[] Supervising Producers Gabrielle Stanton and Harry Werksman on "Under
Pressure"

Original Airdate: April 24, 2006

Shhhhh.... All our doctors are sleeping. It's been a very long season
and they needed a nap...

Just kidding. Kinda. We can't believe we're finally shooting the season
finale. 27 original episodes this season! Putting together this show, we
were once again struck by how much really good, serious stuff happens
every week. Did anyone notice that there wasn't a whole lot of medicine
in the clip show? That's because there wasn't time! If you didn't see
one of your favorite moments, remember, we only have 42 minutes to tell
our story. Some of our favs didn't make it either. But every clip that
made it in, made it in for a reason -- to set up the final five episodes
of season two (the last two episodes will air on one night as a two hour
finale!). All you long-time loyal fans are in for one amazing ride.

Meredith and Derek. Wow have these two been through it or what? And now
they're going to be friends. Go on dog dates, be supportive of each
other... be friends. Really? Can this work? We (the staff) wrote a
version at one point where they decided NOT to be friends but then
thought, nope, there's more emotion to mine if they are friends. Right?
But just when it seems like everything's going to settle down and
Meredith decides to knit, along comes our hunky vet Finn. Hmmm. Place
your bets folks. Friends? Finn? Addison? McDreamy and Mer? Hope the five
episodes remaining are enough. You don't think we're going to let it get
easy for any of them...

There's going to be lots of excitement and heartache for our other
couples too. Burke and Cristina are definitely going to be tested. And
Alex and Izzie and Denny are such a sad triangle. How can Izzie possibly
chose? Denny is so sweet. But did you see Alex and Izzie with that
cupcake? Someone might not be quite as "evil" as he wants everyone to
believe. We love George and Callie too. George is Callie's McDreamy. Who
knew?! But is Callie the McLove of George's life? Can anyone really
replace Meredith in George's heart?

It's frustrating we know, but we just can't give you any answers right
now. Shonda would kill us! But we hope you enjoyed seeing some of our
favorite moments of Grey's and know that you're totally up to speed for
the final five episodes of season two. Get ready, set, Go!

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
