[] Krista Vernoff on writing her first episode...

''"If Tomorrow Never Comes"

Original airdate: 5/1/2005''

Shonda just told me we're blogging season one as they repeat this
summer. BLOGGING SEASON ONE. Seriously, do you know how long ago season
one was? And my brain is not what it once was. Season one. Sheesh.

Okay, here's what I remember: I remember that we all met, this
bedraggled group of writers, for the most part all coming from other
recently cancelled shows. I myself had come from a sweet little show
called Wonderfalls that Fox killed after airing only three episodes. I
liked Wonderfalls. It was fun making little animal figurines talk. We
made thirteen episodes and then we said our goodbyes and I went and got
married and the show got cancelled while I was on my honeymoon. Good
times.

So anyway, I came back looking for a job and I met Shonda and we talked
about American Idol for an hour (because it was the morning after
Jennifer Hudson got voted off and we were scandalized. Scandalized!) and
then she hired me.

And the writers gathered.

In the room, there was the brilliant Jim Parriott, who also was at that
initial interview and seemed deeply disturbed by our AI rantings. There
was Kip, who was really funny and had chickens at his home in West LA.
There were Harry and Gab who were sci-fi junkies and all married and
happy and shiny and funny too. There was Stacy who had been Jim's
assistant when I met Shonda and Jim that first time and she was all
excited about her recent promotion to writer and also kind of
intimidated and quiet and adorable. There was Mimi who is so smart it's
crazy and with whom I had worked my very first year in TV when she was
on Party Of Five and I was on the Jennifer Love Hewitt spin off Time of
Your Life. There was Ann Hamilton who had credits on her resume like
thirtysomething and was therefore intimidating to me despite her wit and
charm. There was Zoanne who was not only a writer but a doctor too. An
actual practicing ER doctor. She STILL works one shift a month in the ER
so she's maybe the coolest person I know. There was, of course, Shonda
who had never been in a writer's room before and who lurked outside the
door, brooding and disturbed like maybe we were all vampires who would
eat her soul if she stepped foot inside.

And then there was me. WHO WOULD NOT SHUT UP.

I swear to you, I got this amazing case of verbal diarrhea and I just
KEPT TALKING.

It was the nerves. And the fact that I'd been unemployed for four months
and had had way too much time on my hands. And the nerves. Did I mention
the nerves? And did I mention how Shonda, who had finally made her way
inside the room, kept looking at me like if I didn't shut up soon she
was going to leave and never come back?

And still, I KEPT TALKING.

I was like George with Meredith in the pilot where he mentions the
strappy sandals and then is convinced that she thinks he's gay -- only I
was George on like, crack. Speedy speedy crack. Except I don't do drugs
so I don't even have that as an excuse. It was truly an appalling,
humiliating, mortifying day in my career. Okay, week. And so, when I got
assigned "If Tomorrow Never Comes," I felt like I had a lot to prove.
Like if the script didn't make up for the compulsive talking, I might
not get to come back for season two. The theme was procrastination,
which I know a thing or two about and we spent a week talking about the
stories in the writers room and then I went away to write.

When I went away, Annie, the tumor-lady, was supposed to live. And
somewhere, in the writing of the first draft, I decided that I had to
kill her. And so I turned in the script and Shonda was all "YOU KILLED
ANNIE?!" and then, in a minute, she was all "You killed Annie." And this
time it was with a proud smile. Like I had joined her in her warped club
of creating characters you like and then killing them like some deranged
serial killer. She was proud. And I got to come back for season two. The
verbal diarrhea, by the way? Sounded a lot like this blog.

So in case you're still wondering why I had to go and kill Annie, it was
this: Alex had been a complete and total ass to her. And George had had
that funny conversation with her (in which, you may have noticed,
"Seriously" is used as a punchline for the first time in our series) and
it affected him. And I felt like, in order for most of those things to
have maximum impact, Annie had to die. Because the theme was
procrastination. And believe it or not, we actually do think about what
kind of message we put into the world. And the message I wanted to give
was not, "Hey it's okay to put off going to see a doctor for two years
cause it all turns out alright in the end." George needed Annie to die
so that he could actually knock on Meredith's door and at least try to
tell her how he was feeling. And I needed Annie to die so I could say
all that stuff at the end about seizing the day already. Cause it's
time. Cause life is short and you never know when it's up. The old man
needed to have the brain surgery before it was too late and while he
could still walk his daughter down the aisle. And Izzie needed to pull
that blood clot out of the guy's chest without a moment's hesitation --
it was a matter of life and death.

And the truth as I see it is this: it's always a matter of life and
death. Every day. Even if you're not a doctor. Even if you're not saving
lives or risking them. Because the thing is we all die eventually and
sometimes without much warning.

A few months ago, I came to work and the flag on the lot was flying at
half-mast. I asked someone why and they told me that Scott Brazil had
died. Our director for this episode, the brilliant and talented and
gentle and kind Scott Brazil, had died. He was the kind of guy who would
wrap a casting session early because he wanted to get to his son's
soccer game. He was the kind of guy who, after working with me on only
this one episode, came to this tiny theatre in Hollywood to see a play I
had written. He brought his wife and another couple and afterwards, he
went on and on about how much they all loved it. He even emailed me the
next day to say it all again. People I worked with for years didn't
bother to come see that play. But Scott came. Because that's the kind of
guy he was.

He was in his fifties when he died.

At his beautiful and funny and just monumentally sad memorial, a lot of
people talked about how Scott was the kind of person who lived life to
the fullest; how he was the kind of guy to just always, always seize the
day.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
