[] Harry and Gabrielle on Syphilis!

''"Who's Zoomin' Who"

Original Airdate: 5/22/05''

Wow. Season one. It seems like such a long time ago. This was our first
script for the show and as with all first scripts, you're just a little
bit nervous. What cool stories can we come up with? Can we capture the
voices of the characters? Will it be dramatic enough? Will it be funny
enough? Will Shonda like it?

Fortunately after a few weeks in the writers room with our brilliant
colleagues, we felt pretty confident about our stories: Richard's
possibly career threatening optical tumor, Meredith forced to confide
one of her dark secrets to Derek; Burke's oldest friend discovering he
not only has an ovary, but a cheatin', knocked up wife...

But George, what should we do with George? Hmmm.. How about...
Syphilis!!

Nobody at the network had a problem with Richard's story, or the Burke
story, but we've got to admit the syphilis was a tough sell. We had to
convince the powers-that-be that our storyline would not only be
dramatic, it would be FUNNY. Fortunately, Shonda had our backs. We're
Grey's Anatomy after all, genital highjinks is our specialty!

We ended up creating a David Letterman-esque "Top Ten Reasons We Can
Give George Syphillis List" and sent it with our episode outline to the
studio and network. Finally, they were convinced and we were in
business. It wasn't until we actually sat down at the computer that we
had a twinge of doubt. Could we really make a disease that results in
open sores and possible insanity, funny?.

You've seen the results, so we'll leave it to you to decide but we think
TR and Sara Utterbeck (Olivia) were amazing in their respective roles.
George getting the shot in the butt scene still makes us laugh and when
George attacks Alex in the locker room, awesome.

Of course, what we should've realized is that Monday morning no one
would be talking about syphilis, they'd be talking about Addison. The
final scene of the episode, when Addison just comes up out of nowhere
was amazing to write and awesome to shoot. (In fact the first time Kate
Walsh said, "And you must be the woman who's screwing my husband?" I,
Gabrielle, almost ruined the take because I couldn't stop myself from
squealing, "nooooooo...." as I watched the monitor in video village. And
I knew it was going to happen! Harry looked at me like I was crazy,
(Okay, I, Harry, have to admit I was also kind of squealing in a very
manly way on the inside).

So, anyway, here below, made public for the first time anywhere, is the
super-secret "Top Ten Reasons We Can Give George Syphilis List" we sent
to the network. Enjoy!

TOP TEN REASONS WE CAN GIVE GEORGE SYPHILIS:

1. Syphilis goes AWAY. It's a serious STD. If untreated it causes
madness and death -- however- once diagnosed it can be treated and cured
with ONE SHOT OF PENICILLIN.

2. Rockdale County -- an upper middle class community -- had an outbreak
of syphilis among white fifteen-year-old college bound girls.

3. It has a nickname: "The Syph"

4. 9/21/04 -- breaking news -- sharp increase in cases of syphilis in
New York state.

5. 70,000 incidents a year -- that's 192 a day and 8 an hour.

6. An Epidemiologist from the CDC, stated an outbreak of syphilis among
Surgical Interns is completely reasonable and plausible event because of
the following:

a. Our characters move in a closed network of people.

b. Long hours, lots of stress and little contact with people outside the
hospital can lead to having unprotected sex with people you work with.

7. Syphilis has catchy prevention campaign slogans such as:

a. Look What's Back! Syphilis!

b. Stop the sores.

c. Making every penis a healthy penis.

8. The anti-syphilis campaign has TWO mascots:

a. A healthy cartoon penis.

b. Mr. Phil, a red cartoon syphilis lesion

9. ER hasn't done it.

10. Did we mention that syphilis is completely CURABLE with ONE shot?!

-Harry and Gabrielle

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
