[] From Stacy McKee, writer of "Raindrops..."

Originally posted on 9/25/05

I have never been as ridiculously nervous as the moment I handed in my
first official draft of "Raindrops Keep Falling On My Head."

We're talking sweaty palms, heart palpitations - I was downright
petrified. Partly because that's a little of what every writer goes
through when they offer up their work for public consumption (and -
let's face it - possible ridicule) - but mostly because I was the
youngest, least experienced writer on staff at Grey's Anatomy - and this
was my very first professional script EVER.

Yeah. I'd group it right up there with that time in third grade when -
convinced the math test I was about to take might very well ruin my
life - I managed to vomit all over my teacher, my test, AND the cute boy
with dimples sitting at the desk right in front of me... (Andrew
Montgomery, if you're reading this, I sincerely apologize.)

But (luckily) "Raindrops" didn't face same reception I endured in third
grade (meaning - despite my insecurities, there was little reason for me
to retreat into my office and hide under my desk) and - in the end, it
was pretty incredible watching my episode come to life... both in front
of the camera - AND behind the scenes.

I was struck by how even the tiniest detail on the page can have a
tremendous ripple effect for the production team... For instance: Peanut
shells.

I had written into my description of Joe's Bar in "Raindrops" that
peanut shells "littered the floor." Now, except for a brief moment when
Joe collapses, we never actually see the bar's floor. The description
was, for me as a writer, there to evoke an ambiance - to give an idea of
the TYPE of bar Joe would run... But I quickly learned that if it was on
the page, it would be on the set.

I'll never forget sitting in our production meeting and discussing how -
since the bar's floor was actually carpeted and not exactly visible -
maybe I could lose the peanut shells on the floor? No problem, I said -
not a big deal. So now, if you read the first line of the script, it
describes: "Lighting is dim, bowls of peanuts clutter the counter, dart
boards & beer signs line the walls..."

But if you look carefully, the peanut shells did make it onto the
counter top.

There I was. Suddenly sitting on set - listening to Patrick Dempsey say
lines I had written... in the middle of the night, cameras everywhere,
with rain pouring down - not from the sky, but from the rain machine
rigged up just for this scene - this scene that I had written. Me - the
new kid with butterflies in her tummy and (still) a violent aversion to
math tests...

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
