[] From Jim Parriott, Executive Producer and writer of "Enough is
Enough"

Originally posted on 10/2/05

We made the pilot + 12 episodes last season, but only aired 8 of the
episodes, holding back 4 to begin this season. These shows are
terrific - but they were meant to end a season, as opposed to begin one,
and, in looking at them, we felt they needed to be fleshed out a little.
To that end, we did some re-shooting and added an episode, 201, that
will air as the second show this season, between episodes shot last
year. I was given the task of writing it.

The trick, of course, is to make it all seamless, both from an
emotional/story arc level and from a purely production point of view.
Hair color and style has got to match - and the performers have to
remember what was going through their heads several months ago. It's not
as easy as it sounds.

My primary goal was to spend a little time with Burke seeing what it was
like to be Chief, while Richard recovered from his surgery. It was also
an opportunity to meet Adele, Richard's wife, who will factor into his
storylines later in the season, and explore the feelings of Meredith and
Cristina, both in the thick of it with their men.

All of the storylines involve the concept of what is enough.
Romantically, surgically, professionally and, in the key medical story.
That story centers around a young man who has to decide whether to
donate half his liver to his alcoholic, violent father. The cool part of
this story was revealing just how much the young man and Alex had in
common. And learning how Alex coped when he'd had enough from his own
abusive father.

The theme of what is enough also informed George and Olivia's story. Her
love for him isn't enough. But how do you tell someone that? George
manages to finally do so - in his own bumbling but utterly charming way.
My hope is that the episode will be both funny and moving, and tee up
the wonderful episodes to come.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
