[] From Zoanne Clack, M.D., writer of "Deny, Deny, Deny"

Originally posted on 10/16/05

As the doctor/writer on the show, I can really relate to trying to have
a real life while going through internship and residency. I did my
training in emergency medicine, but I was this close (showing fingers
really close together) to going into surgery. At the last minute I
decided to do emergency medicine instead which gave me the flexibility
to pursue other interests (like, um, writing). I moved out to LA with my
good "day job" (and I still work in the ER, too, though mostly at night)
and was lucky enough to land my first writing job soon after I made the
move.

Grey's Anatomy is actually my second show but this is my first produced
episode. I think the most amazing moment on set for me was watching
Chandra Wilson humanize Bailey. When she had to call the parents to tell
them Jeremiah had died, it brought up memories of the many times I've
had to do that myself. It was heart wrenching to watch and I felt like
it captured the intensity of the emotions that medicine rigorously
trains doctors to shut down. Through the characters on Grey's, real
emotional issues and medical cases are explored. In fact, in this
episode the case of the gunshot wound to the head was based on a guy I
took care of during my residency. In the real case the patient shot
himself in the head, but that seemed too morbid for our show, plus we'd
already had an episode with a self-inflicted gunshot wound (and how many
times do you want to see that?!).

Putting out accurate medical information is a task that we take very
seriously. We realize we could be an important source of information for
medical and public health issues and see it as our responsibility to
make our medicine as accurate as possible. That said, there is a fine
line between drama and reality. Drama is king, or maybe queen would be
more accurate for our show. We research the medicine very intensely and
have outside doctors that we consult but our main focus is the
relationships of our main characters and the impact that the cases have
on them. As a result, sometimes (but not often, I promise) medical
details are sacrificed to highlight dramatic moments.

Bit of trivia for you: Kalpana Vera is the lady with Munchausen's. The
translation of her name is "imaginary truth." (Kalpana: Hindi, Vera:
Latin)

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
