[] From Krista Vernoff, writer of "Into You Like a Train"

Originally posted on 10/30/05

So - you saw last week's episode - written by the always brilliant
Shonda Rhimes - wunderkind creator of Grey's Anatomy? Okay, yeah, not
only written by Shonda, but written by Shonda as a season finale?
Written by Shonda to leave such an impact on you that you would wait for
four months, salivating and debating all summer long, then come back in
the fall to see how it all panned out? So, imagine my surprise, I mean
delight, okay HORROR, when Shonda assigned me to write the episode that
followed hers, and would air not four months later, when the audience
had had time to digest and process Meredith's brilliant "Pick me, Choose
me, Love me" speech - but one week later, when all the drama of that
beautiful "season finale" was still utterly fresh in the audience's
minds. A tall order, to say the least.

Thank God we have an unbelievably talented writing staff and research
staff and a writers' room that forever generates good ideas. That's one
of my favorite things about writing and producing hour-long television -
that every episode is, in a great many ways, a group effort. Stacy
McKee, I think it was, pitched the idea of a train wreck - since that's
how Meredith, and pretty much every woman we know, would feel after
opening her heart to that degree. And out of a train wreck, there's room
for almost any kind of medical story you want to tell...

We'd had a doctor in the writer's room several months before who'd told
us about his work on the burn unit. He told us about a pregnant woman
who was so badly burned that she couldn't touch or hold her baby which
had to be delivered in an emergency c-section. He told us how he'd held
the baby to the woman's face - the one area of her body that she could
still feel... The image made us cry - and we knew we had to find a way
to work that image into the show. The train wreck seemed like the
perfect opportunity. I think that's the kind of the thing people don't
realize - that sometimes a whole story grows out of our desire to
include one single image... When I left the writer's room and went to my
office to flesh out that story, my notes said "pregnant burn victim,
baby on face." That's it. So the whole best friends having babies
together came from many dark hours slamming my head against my keyboard,
muttering "heeeeeelp" and "I'm sooo tiiiiired" and "whyyyy meeee" to the
bear figurine I keep on my desk which, at three am one particularly
horrible night, started to look a lot like it was mocking me and this
pathetic notion that I could be a writer for a living... But I digress.

So. The train wreck... We had the pregnant burn victim, and we had heard
a story, I think from Zoanne Clack, our brilliant
writer/doctor/over-achiever, about how sometimes, when people are
bleeding internally, and in shock, they die very quietly. We thought it
would be funny to spin it - make the dying woman loud instead of quiet
and that's where the character we lovingly referred to as "Chatty Cathy"
was born. Eventually, she became "Yvonne," after my friend Yvonne, who
whined to me one day that I never name any characters after her. That's
another little thing we do, give the characters catch phrases like "Mr.
Parkinsons" and "Tumor Lady" when trying to track their stories in the
writer's room - and name them later in the script stage. Which brings us
to Bonnie and Tom - the impaled couple - who, until the script stage, we
referred to as Bonnie and Clyde. (Cause they're stuck together, and
bloody and, okay, I think you get it. ) Jim Parriott, executive
producer/writer-extraordinaire pitched this idea and when he did, I
thought, "Fiiiine, I'll stop whining about having to write the damn
train wreck episode that follows the brilliant would-be season finale
because holy crap how great is this idea?"

I never did stop whining - But I loved the idea because not only is it
medically fascinating and emotionally torturous, but metaphorically -
and we're big on metaphor here at Grey's - it's awesome. Derek has been
asked by Meredith to choose between the two women he loves. And the
doctors are being asked to choose between two patients who are still
sitting up talking, laughing, very much alive... At the end, one of them
will be dead. Which is, I think, how Meredith feels when Derek says
"She's my wife." Also, when Meredith asks at the end of an act "How do
you choose which one gets to live" - she still doesn't have her answer
from Derek about his other choice - so it's doubly loaded. This is the
kind of thing a writer loves. Oh - and in the beautifully directed and
edited sequence where Bonnie and Tom are separated, it feels, I think,
very similar to how it feels for Meredith and Derek to be separated. And
for how it felt for the audience to watch Meredith and Derek be
separated. Which I know you hate me for. So all I'll say is this: SHONDA
MADE ME DO IT!!!

(P.S. Kip Koenig, another of our brilliant writers, pitched the title
"Into You Like a Train" - from a Psychedelic Furs song. Before that, the
episode was called "You Oughta Know" after the Alanis Morissette song -
and because the theme of the episode is actually about being in the
know - because Meredith wants to know what Derek's decision is, and
because the doctors don't know what will happen when they pull the pole
from Bonnie and Tom, and because Alex didn't know Yvonne was bleeding
internally etc. But then Alanis did that weird acoustic cover album of
her own music and sold it in Starbucks and Shonda found it upsetting and
besides the Psychedelic Furs title is just plain better. The End).

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
