[] From Stacy McKee, writer of "Something To Talk About"

Episode Airdate: 11/6/05

Ladies and Gentlemen - boys and girls! Step right up for one hell of a
challenge -- Create a script to follow four unbelievably sweepsy
episodes and a show featuring the most heartbreaking, terrible,
horrible, no-good, very bad trainwreck ever... Now - GO!

Ok - so maybe crafting this episode wasn't exactly like a crazy carnival
ride... but at times, it was close. Not just because it's the first
episode yet where Meredith and Derek never once have a real conversation
together (and, let's face it, some of us wait anxiously every week for
those quintessential McDreamy moments)... but also because - Hello. It's
the episode after a trainwreck!!! How on earth do you follow something
like that??

The answer is - you don't. At least, not with more of the same. If the
train wreck episode made everyone cry (and you know it did -- that
sloppy, sniffly, messy but you don't care because you're at home and no
one can see you kind of cry)... then as far as I was concerned, my
episode should make everyone laugh - hopefully, just as hard.

Enter: the Medical Fascinoma.

In the medical community, a "fascinoma" is an anomaly. A medical
mystery. Something so rare or unusual that not only is it uncommon, but
it's completely intriguing to the doctors around it. So if one were to
show up at Seattle Grace, it would - quite literally - be "Something To
Talk About." The perfect medical case to compliment Meredith's obvious
character arc in this episode -- she's become a fascinoma herself. She's
like a carnival freak show. The entire hospital is talking about her.
Perfect.

Only, finding the perfect fascinoma was, as it turns out, easier said
than done. I think we went through a good dozen different possible
fascinoma cases in the writers' room - and by my final draft of the
script, the fascinoma case had changed at least four more times... The
more we brainstormed, the more obvious one thing became: What is
fascinating to the medical community... is not so fascinating on TV.

For example, picture an episode about... outrageously high
liver-function-test numbers. OR, an inappropriately transferred critical
patient. OR a particularly slow night at the hospital during which the
attending on-call... did NOT take a nap.

Yeah. Not so exciting. And definitely not all that funny.

In the end, the idea for a "pregnant man" came from one of us cracking a
joke. "Too bad we can't just do something medically IMPOSSIBLE. Like
make some dude pregnant. Now that would be a fascinoma." We all laughed.
Things quieted down. There was a moment of silence, and then - it seemed
obvious. Why not try?

So, after multiple drafts, obscene amounts of caffeine, and a great deal
of sleep deprivation (yes - my script about a freak-show had pretty much
turned me into one...) the episode was ready...

I coupled the pregnant man with a heart on fire and one very STEAMY
kiss... to (hopefully) create an episode that people will definitely
talk about.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
