[] From Mimi Schmir, writer of "Let it Be"

Episode Airdate: 11/13/05

So I was at this party on Saturday night. Nothing fancy, house in the
Hills, friend turning ...gasp...forty. And this dude comes up to me and
says how much he loves the show (which is cool...I mean, how often does
that happen) and then he tells me it's moving and funny and sexy and
topical (all good, I'm thinking) but he's wondering...(okay, here it
comes, I'm sure)...he's wondering if sometimes we're a little..."wacky."

Hmm. "Wacky," I think. (And where's that pomegranite martini I left on
the picnic table, I'm thinking about that too. That, and the fact that
men in velvet jackets are apparently "in" again...what's up with THAT?)
So I'm mulling over my episode and I'm thinking, not so wacky. Woman
with a cancer gene that could seal her fate in a moment. Old couple who
are destined to be together forever...through life and death. Guy who
has a heart attack at just the right time.

Man who tries to commit suicide and whose life is saved...by a pigeon.

Okay. First of all, the pigeon story is real. Kind of. It's loosely
based on something we heard about a man who fell out of a window and
landed on a rat. Somehow, through a strange combination of luck and
physics and...fate...the rat saved his life. True story. We like to
believe.

Because what we're really talking about here is fate. What fate has in
store for us and how we can take fate into our own hands. You know what
I'm talking about. It's that boy you knew in high school who you walked
away from but secretly still love. It's that friend you fought with who
you still think about all the time. It's the job you didn't take, or
did. It's the road less traveled, the opportunity won or lost. It's what
you were born with or without or walked away from or towards. It's the
choice you did or didn't make -- to go to that party, pick up that
phone, tell that person you love them, take that shot in the dark. It's
about talking your life in your own hands. About whether we even have
the choice and chance to do that.

So. If you had the opportunity to test for a gene that could tell you
you might die, would you do it? And if you took the test, then what?
Would you do surgery that could change your body forever, but save your
life at the same time? If the parts of your body that needed to be
removed were what defined you sexually as a man or a woman...how would
you react? (And really, what defines us as men and women?) What would
you do? What would society expect you to do?

Not easy questions, right? (You want that martini now, huh? Either that
or the Lemon Drop. Or tequila, if you're Meredith Grey.) And this wasn't
an easy episode to write. Many people had many opinions. Which happens.
And some of it was based on medicine, and some on emotion and some on
personal experience. At the end of the day, raising a controversial
issue on a television show can be a weighty thing. Because there is
responsibility involved. The fact that millions of people are watching
is something that you forget...and then suddenly remember. But the fate
of it...how you deal with determining your own fate...or not...that's
what we were thinking here. The rest of it, that's for the audience to
take as it will.

Fate. It's part of our lives. Marfan dude's fate was sealed by the fact
that he collapsed in front of Burke and Cristina on their date. Esme and
Jed took each other's hands and walked towards Venice and that gondola.
They are fated to be together for eternity. Meredith and McDreamy want
to inhale each other, to inhabit each other. But are they fated to be
together? We're not telling...

We're talking about fate here. Which is complicated and poignant and
scary and funny all at the same time. That's what this episode is really
about. It's about self-determination and chance, about how true love
transcends time and even life itself. It's about how fate and love are
often one and the same.

So, here's the thing, party dude. (And, by the way, he wasn't the one in
the velvet jacket. Even though he did have a pomegranite martini in his
hand.) Maybe we are a little wacky sometimes. Life can be wacky. And
fate...fate is the wackiest thing of all.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
