[] From Shonda Rhimes, creator and writer of upcoming post-Super Bowl
episode

Episode Airdate: 2/5/06 -- After the Super Bowl!!!

So I'm all..."Pitch for the Superbowl episode? Sure, why not...they
won't pick us...so it's no big deal..." I typed out a one page synopsis
and sent it in to the powers-that-be at Touchstone and ABC. Then I lay
back down on the couch and promptly forgot about it.

They picked us.

Now, to understand what this meant to me, you have to understand how I
write. I don't. Not until the last possible minute. Then I churn it all
out in a crazed frenzy while eating ice chips and cursing the gods for
not making me something sensible like an astronaut or a prima ballerina.
Prima ballerinas do not have to write things. But I guess since they
have to be freakishly thin, they may have it worse off than me.

But I was sick. Actually sick -- not my usual drama sick. So sick that
members of the cast were peering through the door at me in my office and
very kindly trying to suggest that maybe I might want to consider
heading over to the nearest hospital and moving in for a while. So sick
that the medical research team did an intervention and sent one of their
own in to examine. So sick that the entire show had to be shut down for
a week so that I could recover enough to not cough up pieces of my lung
on my computer screen while writing. Let me tell you: it sucked.

Now, I tell you this as a shameless ploy for sympathy. I love sympathy
as I am a neurotic writer. And to distract you from the fact that,
because I am a neurotic writer, I procrastinated and procrastinated
until literally the DAY of the read-through (a read-through is when we
gather together the entire cast and they do us the honor of reading the
script out loud at a big round table -- even after a season and a half,
it is amazing to me that I get to hear my words read aloud by these
truly talented people). At which point, I started writing like a crazed
fiend. I finished writing the script just in time for my team to make
copies of the script and race them over to put them into the cast's
hands as they were taking their seats at the big round table. None of
us, including me, had any idea if what I'd written would even work. I
was nervous and wishing I was still sick. Because you never know. I love
my actors and my actors like me well enough. But still...

Perhaps they would chase me with torches and stone me to death with rage
at my idiocy. Perhaps they'd smile politely but coldly at me and run to
call their agents so that they could beg to get off this show. Or, you
know, perhaps they would raise me on their shoulders and carry me around
singing showtunes in my honor.

They did nothing of the sort. What they did do was gasp, yell, hoot with
laughter, applaud and openly weep as they read the pages aloud. Ellen
Pompeo shrieked "HOLY CRAP!" right in the middle of the reading. Katie
Heigl started to cry somewhere around page 20. Sandra Oh just kept
whispering "oh my gosh, oh my gosh, oh, oh, OH MY GOSH." And after I got
hugs. I am not the hugging kind but still...if you stand very still and
hug back, it is nice. The director, Peter Horton, was thrilled. The
writers were thrilled. The studio and the network were thrilled.

Thrilled. It's good, that word. Thrilled.

So please watch.

I hope you like it. A lot of work by the cast and crew went into this
episode. Work I'll be able to explain to you after the episode airs and
it stops being the big giant secret episode that we don't talk about...

More from Shonda Rhimes on "The End Of The World..."

Episode Airdate: 2/5/06

Please tell me you watched the show.

PLEASE.

I say that because I'm gonna lie awake all night worrying that maybe you
DIDN'T watch, that maybe you decided to go to bed or go out with friends
or do something crazy like -- I don't know -- NOT WATCH. So please,
please, please...

I'm betting many of you got to the last moment of the episode, heard
Meredith whispering "what did I do, what did I do, what did I do..." and
shrieked at the TV when you saw the credits. That's what my Mom did when
I showed her the episode a week ago. She was all, "THAT'S ALL YOU ARE
GONNA SHOW ME?! WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?!" And when I wouldn't tell her, she
got kind of mad and guilted me with the fact that I came out of her
body.

To be fair to you, I get that you hate me right now. I mean...I left you
hanging. But, to be fair to me, I did not know until a day into
production that this was gonna be a two hour thing. See, I made this
innocent call to Channing (the coolest executive at Touchstone TV -- if
you meet her, buy her a free drink because she was instrumental in our
show ever getting on the air) and I asked if maybe we could have an hour
and a half for this episode instead of just an hour. She said she'd make
a few calls. A few hours later, the president of the network, Steve
McPherson (another extremely cool person) had me on the phone and was
like, "I think two hours would be amazing." Now, a tip should you ever
have your own TV show -- you don't say no to the president of the
network. Frankly, I didn't even THINK about saying no. I mean, a chance
to make the episode bigger? A chance to do all the things I'd wanted to
do with the episode but could never have done in 42 minutes (which is
how long an episode is without commercials)? That kind of chance, that
kind of vote of confidence from the network for our show, our proverbial
little show that could?

I said, "No problem." Then I hung up and hyperventilated.

Because while I knew I could do this first hour, this hour that you
watched tonight, I had NO IDEA what I was going to do to fill the entire
second hour. So while director Peter Horton started shooting, I sat on
the floor of my office and tried to figure out how to expand the episode
without a) ruining the episode and b) expanding the episode so much that
it didn't flow. And I did figure it out. I think. You'll have to watch
next week to see if you agree.

About this episode: what I'm really proud of if that even though this
episode is Grey's Anatomy on speed, even though there's a bomb in a body
cavity, even though we had guest stars like Christina Ricci (how good
was she?!) and Kyle Chandler (how cute is he?!), even though, even
though, even though...it is still very much our show. It is still more
about the relationships that it is about the medicine.

What this episode is about is birth, sex and death. Bailey's pregnant,
Meredith's afraid she might die and Izzie and Alex...well, they do.
Don't knock Izzie for going for it -- when life hangs in the balance, we
all do what we can for comfort. And her speech in the linen closet was
one of my favorite performances of the episode. That, and Meredith's
long speech in bed to Cristina about Addison taking her McDreamy, her
McDog, her McLife. But my favorite, favorite moment in the whole thing
is the "Pink Mist" scene. It's one of the first times we've ever had a
scene on GA that didn't involve a single one of our 10 main characters.
And, as expected, Christina Ricci's amazing but Dr. Milton...my God, we
didn't even have anyone to play the part until the very day we shot the
scene and originally, he only had two lines...Dr. Milton is perfection.
My favorite line? "Even beats."

About the shower scene: I knew it was the Superbowl, people. I knew a
little girl-on-girl would be good with the Superbowl boys and maybe keep
them watching. I'm not stupid. But I also wanted to do something a) that
was not gratuitous and b) that is turned on its ear in the second part
that airs next week. And Katie, Sandra and Ellen (that's Izzie, Cristina
and Meredith) were total troupers for pulling it off with such humor.
They wore sweatpants and little tube top thingies and soaped each other
up for hours without a single word of complaint. And it was cold that
day. Really cold. It's why I love our cast. I write stuff and they leap.
They're leapers. So watch for next week's shower scene and remember this
one and know that I am shouting, "HA! You think girl-on-girl threesomes
are real? NO WAY. THIS is how women take care of each other."

The Music: a lot of you know that I pick the songs myself. But this
episode was different. First of all, my editor Ed Ornelas and I used a
lot of drums -- which we've never done before. The drums are the sound
of Meredith's fear. Did you notice that the first Mer/Der scene starts
with that drumbeat that sends us into a dream-like silence so you'd end
up with the feeling that the moment between the two of them may or may
not have happened? Did you notice that the drums signal death? I hope
so. Second, we had this AMAZING song by Chris Martin and Michael Stipe
in our hands that we could debut on our show if we had a place for it.
And all the proceeds that came from people buying the song on iTunes
would go to charity. So that ending, that song placement was like a
gift.

But there are some greater moments coming. Please tell me you watched.
And that you'll watch again next week. Because honestly, aside from my
daughter, I've never enjoyed anything more than working on this show. It
is a pleasure entertaining you.

EVEN more from Shonda... Thank you!

Okay....how much do I love you guys?

You really did watch. YOU WATCHED. Thank you. Even to those of you who
wrote to say that I'm a horrid skank and that you hated the shower scene
and you hated me and the show and puppies and candy and whiskers on
kittens and raindrops on roses....well, you watched too and you have a
total right to your opinion so....thank you too.

I am honestly so grateful that I am posting one more time. At first, I
told myself I was posting because over 600 of you wrote back in the
comments -- which is unprecendented and exciting for our little blog. Or
that I was posting again because you had so many questions. But, truth
is, I literally can not wait for you to see next week's episode so I had
to post. And because I really am grateful.

That and the fact that I'm all worried about my fellow Tivo users who
had the show cut off early because, while Tivo can do a lot, it can't
know ahead of time that the Super Bowl is gonna run long.

I heard your screams of rage and pain all the way over at my house.
Dudes, my Tivo didn't catch the whole thing either. And I know that I
have access to a recorded version of the show that I can watch unlike
everyone else in America, but what I do not have is a full Tivo-ed
version of the show with all the commercials and everything. Because I
had this big old party going on with my friends and the cast and the
crew and we were all so busy yelling and freaking out that we were
actually on TV, that I missed all the commercials.

Truth is, I had to go hide in a corner while it aired because I was
kinda overwhelmed by the whole thing. There was a Super Bowl. And then
we aired right after it. That is CRAZY.

Anyway, I want all you Tivo-ers and people who missed the episode to
know that I am personally begging the network to re-run the episode
sometime before next Sunday so that we can have it for our Tivos. And
maybe they will. I'll keep you posted. Or you can make a call or send an
email to the good folks at the network and suggest to them that they
maybe want to run it again. Use your nicest voices and ask really,
really politely. And don't tell them you got the idea from me.

Also, I want you all who wrote to say "what happens next" to know that
since you did not push me out your body the way my Mom did, I can't tell
you anything. I mean, I told her. I had to. She made me show her the
episode. And I told my daughter who is usually in the next room whenever
I'm watching the rough cuts of the show. But she is only three years old
and frankly could care less about the show except when George comes on
screen. When George comes on screen, my daughter puts down her Playdoh
and yells, "That's my friend!" She just likes the way he looks and the
sound of his voice and the fact that whenever she sees him in real life,
he speaks to her in a very serious tone as if she were Diane Sawyer and
not a three year old with her finger up her nose. Which is a long way to
say, I can't tell you what happens next.

I can tell you there will be good music. And that you should probably be
prepared for some pretty big stuff to happen. And that many people like
this second part even better than the first part.

After next Sunday's episode, I'll try to write in more depth about the
stories and the characters and why I did what I did in both episodes.
Right now, my hands are tied because until you see "(As We Know It)" --
which is the title of next Sunday's episode -- I really can't say much
without giving things away. And you know how I feel about that.

I read every last one of your posts. I always do. So do the other
writers. We can't tell you how much that feedback means to us. We don't
really check message boards and we try not to pay attention to the
press. But we feel like you who post here are our core group, our
friends and truth-tellers, so your words keep us going or make us think
in new directions or inspire us when we are feeling as if no one is
watching despite what the ratings say.

You guys kinda rock.

Kinda?

You just plain rock.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
