[] From Shonda Rhimes, Creator of Grey's Anatomy...

''On "Superstitions"

Original airdate: 3-19-06''

So tonight's episode was written by the brilliant Jim Parriott. But
Jim's off helping some other television show get on its feet these days
so...you're hearing from me about this episode.

There are a lot of things I could tell you about the history of Ellis
and Richard. I spend hours, days, MONTHS thinking about these two
characters. What happened between them 20 years ago is enough to fill a
whole television series all on its own. I have a secret fond wish to
write and publish The Diaries of Ellis Grey. That woman fascinates me.
And Richard's love for her fascinates me. I get why they fell in love --
the two of them were surgical interns at a time when most surgical
interns were white males. They were different, they were outsiders and
they had each other. Of course they fell in love. That their love didn't
work out, that Richard failed to leave his spouse after Ellis left hers,
that Ellis' departure from Seattle Grace drove Richard to his alcoholic
bottom...well, that makes for a juicy history.

What? You were surprised about Richard's alcoholism? I was too. I was
sitting at home late one night with a sick kid when the writers called
me with this idea. Richard is an alcoholic. I was all, NO HE'S NOT! And
they pitched the idea again. And they pitched again. And again. These
writers of mine, they are willful and determined (especially that damned
Krista Vernoff). They wouldn't shut up about it. "He's totally an
alcoholic and here's why." I hate them sometimes. Especially when they
are right. Because Richard is totally an alcoholic and now I see why.
Damn them.

And then there is Denny. Denny. Ah, Denny...

Oops. Sorry. I went into my fantasy world for a moment there. The
fantasy world in which I am Izzie and Denny is well, Denny and he loves
me with that damaged heart of his. Do you love Denny as much as I do?
Because I LOVE Denny. Yeah, I love the actor Jeffrey Dean Morgan and all
but what I really love is Denny. I love the sexy heart-needing dude in
the hospital bed in a way that is not natural and definitely not healthy
and most certainly not sane. I love Denny with my full whole soul in a
"you jump, I jump" kinda way that means there should be a restraining
order in place to keep me away from him. You can understand Alex's rage
and jealousy. Because there is nothing he can do to compete. In real
life, the actor who plays Alex (Justin Chambers) is the sweetest,
kindest, most normal family man in the world. But the guy he plays on
the show is a vicious mess. And battling a drawling, sexy, sweet heart
patient for Izzie's affections is starting to wear on him. All I can say
is wait until you see what happens next.

The Mer/Der of it all. They are friends. Really. Kind of. Well, not so
much friends. But they think they are friends. You should maybe take
note of the fact that Derek didn't take it so well when Meredith told
him about George. You should maybe note that he got a look on his face.
And you should remember that I said that EVERYTHING on our show comes
back around again. That's all I'm saying. You just remember that.

Bailey and her baby. A lot of you wrote to rant about the fact that
Bailey brings her baby to work and that babies don't belong in
hospitals. I'd like to gently remind you that hospitals are filled with
babies. Hospitals are, in fact, where people go to push babies out into
the world. Babies start out in hospitals. So...you know, deal with it.
Plus, the very first idea I had when Chandra Wilson (who plays Bailey)
told me she was pregnant was that I'd love to see Bailey bringing her
baby to work and challenging the Chief when he suggested it was
inappropriate. As a mother myself, I have a thing about that. You want
me to work? Fine. Great. No problem. But see this tiny baby right here?
This baby comes along with me.

Hmmm. Okay, that's all I can think of to say about this episode for
tonight. My brain is kinda empty. See, I just went to the TV Land Awards
where Grey's Anatomy was named the Future Classic of 2006 and I'm still
totally FREAKING OUT. I mean, the entire cast of Dallas was there. And
the entire cast of Cheers. And, I kid you not, the entire cast of GOOD
TIMES. Yes, GOOD TIMES. Remember Janet Jackson and the iron burn on her
back? Remember when James died? It was AWESOME. I need to lie down and
process the fact that I was in the same room as JJ. And JR. Do you know
that 350 million people watched the episode where it was revealed who
shot JR?

I have so much writing to do if I'm even going to begin to think about
coming anywhere close to the universe of that kind of super amazing
television history. I should, in fact, be writing right now...

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
