[] From Blythe Robe, writer of "Name of the Game"

Original Airdate: 4-2-06

Typical. Leave it to life to know just when you've sworn off the game.
Just when you've decided to be alone, have your Mary Tyler Moore phase
and "make it on your own," made your vow of celibacy, then -- POOF! --
out of no where comes a sexy veterinarian with a whole "ooh look at me
I'm saving your dog's life, and I also routinely saves the lives of
innocent puppies and am no doubt a good person and clearly
irresistible!" thing. It's like the universe can smell the fact that you
are completely content about flying solo and decides to throw a big old
sexy distraction your way in some sort of twisted joke, and you, of
course, are powerless because, well it's the universe, and it's a guy,
and so you have no choice but to play yet again. Just typical.

Having gotten that off my chest I would also just like to say... Well,
hello Chris O'Donnell! If anyone's going to pull Meredith out of the McD
rut, he just might be up for the challenge. But, I suppose we're just
gonna have to wait and see about that...damnit!

So, tonight's theme was "the games we play." The reason I love this
theme so much is because games are so much a part of this show. It goes
all the way back to the very beginning when Shonda introduced their
internship as "the game." The competition, striving for excellence, and
the surgeries themselves are all a part of it. But it's also the
emotional game -- fueled by the interns' relationships with each other,
with their patients, and with the hope of somehow, some way finding the
time in their absurdly busy lives to get laid, (and maybe even find love
in the process.) It's quite a complex game - like Shogi.

But it's mostly fueled by their obsession with being "the best," and no
one is more obsessed than Cristina. After losing the night's battle of
Celebrity (perhaps Isaiah/Burke at his funniest) she becomes a woman in
need if a good victory. Like a success junkie -- she needs her fix. So,
when she gets to the Laparoscopic Lab Tutorial, there's nothing that
will stop her from being the prize pupil - even if it means beating out
the Chief. My favorite thing about this story is the fact that Cristina
has such a one-track mind that she loses sight of all social tact and
inappropriately tries to school the Chief. I love her for this. And I
love that Richard falls into it as well -- (Jim Pickens is so great and
he did such a hilarious job with this storyline!) But in the end it's
the Chief who teaches her the most important lesson about never
underestimating the power of the basics, one that she (ahem) uses to get
George out of her apartment, and thank god!

Yes, George seems to be moving on and I'm so happy for him!

George is really put through a lot in this episode. He's been playing
the angry game for so long now that it's started to eat away at his
entire being. He's "broken," like Izzie says, and has allowed his anger
to overrule the fact that he still cares about his friends. As a defense
mechanism, anger is such an easy and natural trap to fall into, and it
can sometimes take extreme circumstances to pull you out of it. So, when
Thatcher (the incredible Jeff Perry) and family (holy crap, Mare
Winningham!) show up at the hospital, he's forced to take a step back
from the situation and see that deep down maybe he doesn't hate, hate
Meredith. And when he chooses to tell Thatcher about Meredith's good
nature, he in turn is taking a teeny baby step towards healing, and I
think no one will benefit more from his forfeiting the angry game than
George. Just look at Thatcher.

Shonda has created such an interesting parallel between
George/Meredith/Derek and Thatcher/Ellis/Richard. For Ellis, Thatcher
was her George and Richard her McDreamy. In their story Ellis spent her
life pining over Richard, while nearly ruining Thatcher's in the
process. Her neglect scarred Thatcher so deeply that it spoiled his
relationship with his own daughter, a regret he will have to carry for
the rest of his life. Again, the angry game is one of the toughest to
beat. But you know what helps? New prospects. Prospects like sexy Vets
and Ortho Docs.

I'm SO relieved that George finally made out with Ortho Doc! And it was
so sweet and actually kinda HOT -- Go George! In the immortal words of
Alex Karev "get yours!"

Speaking of getting some, why why why doesn't Denny exist in real life!?
I want him to be real so desperately I've actually entertained the
thought of cruising ICU's for a damaged heart guy of my very own....Damn
you Ms. Rhimes for creating that "beautiful, beautiful man!" I admit, I
love him, too. I love that he can be sensitive and dirty at the same
time. But most of all I love the way Izzie lights up when she's around
him. I love their relationship because it's so pure and honest and
completely game free (save on the Scrabble.) They make me so happy.

Speaking of "game free," I'm so proud of Alex for standing up for his
convictions. I respect his code of honesty with his patients. Now,
ordinarily I'm all for avoidance and denial. Denial is one of my
favorite human traits. It's what keeps us ahead -- it's our
psychological opposable thumb in my opinion. However, in Beatrice's (a
stunning performance by Laurie Metcalf) case, someone needed to offer
her a dose of reality and in those situations it's usually not the nice
route that's gonna get you there. Sometimes brutal honesty has to be the
name of the game.

Like Bailey needing to be honest with herself that it may take a little
time to get back in the swing of things. I love that Chandra Wilson can
actually break your heart and make you laugh in a single moment.

Several months ago I was invited to play the most extreme game of my
life thus far: to write an episode of the incredible series "Grey's
Anatomy," and it has been one of the most intense, complicated,
stressful and rewarding experiences I've ever known. I want to say thank
you so much to Shonda Rhimes and Jim Parriott for the opportunity of a
lifetime. As well as a special thanks to Krista Vernoff for her
guidance, and expertise -- also for generally being so awesome (Can you
actually thank a person for that? Sure, why not?) I also want to give a
quick shout out to all the Homie-scribes of Talmadge -- pour some out
for me the next round; I miss and love you all!

Finally one last thank you, as I am also a fan of this show, to Shonda
for these characters, this world, and for bringing back the sass.

Best game ever!

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
