[] Shonda on "Damage Case"

Original Airdate: May 7, 2006

I gotta be honest.

I have no idea what to say in this here, our blog entry for tonight's
episode "Damage Case."

No. Freaking. Idea.

Why?

Because I'm scared I might spill the beans. About the finale. The
gi-normous two-night, three hour finale the writers and the cast and the
crew have been working their butts off on. I'm usually good with the
secrets. I didn't tell you about Meredith and George. I didn't let it
slip that Dylan was gonna explode. I kept the food-eating contest to
myself.

But I'm a tiny bit tired from making 27 episodes of television. And my
mind is all crazy because fourteen days from now, it has become clear
that everyone around me thinks I'm going to take time off. That I'm
going to stop thinking about my friends at Seattle Grace. That I won't
get in the car, drive to the studio and obsess about Meredith and George
and Izzie and Cristina and Derek and everybody. That I'm going to...I
don't know...SLEEP. Or see my actual three-dimensional friends who,
while lovable, get kinda cranky when I write dialogue and ask them to
say it out loud. I'm supposed to go on vacation? Are you serious?

Anyway, my point is, I'm weak. I'm a weak pathetic shell of my former
self so my super-hero-secret-keeping powers are not working so good.
They are broken. But I will do my best. I will do my best to just chat
calmly and quietly about "Damage Case" and pretend those other future
episodes don't exist.

This episode was originally borne of an idea one of our writers Mimi
Schmir had about this amazing damage control surgery. I think it was
Krista Vernoff who suggested that what would be cool is if our interns
are all working on patients from a single family. Which is how I ended
up writing "hillbilly" dialogue. I love the big-haired Southern girl and
her family. I love the Mama who says "good girl" instead of "vagina" and
I love Big Jim who screams "Melly!! MELLY!!!" in a crazy Deliverance
way. But what I got the most joy from is humanizing them. What starts
out as a funny hillybilly picnic story where you kind of mock this
family slowly turns into a story about loss, love and forgiveness. Mama
gives that wonderful speech about how a mother should be in on making
decisions for her daughter. Big Jim offers a moment of grace to the boy
who killed his daughter. And Noah breaks my heart every time when I
think of him left with a baby but without the love of his life. I love
this family. And I love even more how in the midst of all of their
tragedy and pain, we watch our characters struggle through.

"Yeah, yeah," you're thinking, "get to that argument with Meredith and
Derek!"

I'm getting there. But first I have to make a detour. A detour over to
the Land of Callie Peeing. You know I have to go there. This may be one
of my favorite moments of our show EVER. It's right up there with George
gets the syph for me. Maybe not for you. But for me...Callie walking
into that bathroom topless and peeing in front of Meredith and Izzie was
SO GREAT. Because it was SO HORRIBLE. I love that Mer and Izzie respond
with all the trauma of having viewed a car crash. And I love even more
the very sweet moment at the end where Callie says that she did wash her
hands but she did it in the kitchen because those girls were looking at
her like...

You know who Callie was in high school, right? You know she was the
outsider, the loner rebel chick who didn't have many friends and wore
weird clothes and was just tortured by the cool kids. Callie, as played
with Sara Ramirez ...dudes, Sara won a TONY AWARD for Spamalot -- I saw
her in the show and she ROCKED and then we met for breakfast and
discovered that we were like best friends who'd never ever met and
talked for hours and hours and hours and...okay, I digress. My point is
that Sara makes Callie so vulnerable in her kickass toughness. And when
I, in near terror, asked her take off her clothes and do a scene where
she pees in front of Meredith and Izzie, she was all, "I'm on it" and
threw herself into the scene. I am frankly hoping that the ABC shopping
site tells us where we can buy those panties she was wearing because
those were the best panties EVER next to Izzie's Season One Hello Kitty
panties and I have to own some. I think I would be less angry about
going on vacation if I had some cool Callie panties. I would never pee
in front of other people but I would be happy.

Once again, I'm losing the point. The point...the point...the point is
Callie pees and Izzie tortures her a tiny bit about the hand washing and
that made me overjoyed because that's the kind of thing people do.

The other detour I wanna make is over to Denny-ville. I love Denny. In a
dangerous way. Denny is very real to me. He's no character I made up.
He's DENNY. He's human for me in a way that makes the actor Jeffrey Dean
Morgan nervous when I get within fifty feet of him. See, when Denny gets
all depressed about being an invalid, I want to climb in bed with him
just like Izzie does. What's shocking about Denny's depression is that
we are so not used to seeing him angry. He's so sweet. But being an
invalid wears down the spirit -- that's what our doctors tell us, that's
what we all know from seeing it happen to people we know. And I wanted
us to see a little of that. I wanted us to see that Denny is starting to
despair of ever getting a heart. That Denny is about to give up. Which
breaks my Denny-loving heart because he's Denny and I just want to watch
him play Scrabble and say things in that drawl of his.

Okay, last detour: Alex saving the baby. I love that we have a character
who can do something wonderful but still be a selfish cranky ass about
it. Alex gets to be complex in ways most characters don't because even
though he's got a moral code, his moral code is totally twisted and
dark. But he's essentially good -- deep down inside.

And now, finally, the Mer/Der of it all. He's so angry. And that anger
has been kinda building since all the way back when Meredith told him
about George. And it just gets SO much worse when he sees her at Finn's
and assumes she is sleeping with him. The man is jealous. McDreamy is
jealous. Beyond all reason or sanity or any rational thought. He's just
jealous. And that fight they have in the stairwell...oh, I was proud of
Meredith for standing up for herself. I was a proud, proud Mama. But my
little heart was also breaking. Because he's so angry. And she's so
angry. And then in the next episode...

Oh, yeah, right. No talk about the next episode. But it's a big one.
That gets bigger. And then it gets even bigger. But I can't talk about
it.

I can talk about how cute and hot Finn is and how much I love it when he
says "I never said I wasn't scary and damaged too." Because he is like
Meredith. And that gives her a little bit of hope. It may give you hope
too. Or it may give you a seizure because you want your Mer and your Der
BACK TOGETHER and you want them back together NOW.

I could tell you so many things. So many. If I could. Which I can. But I
won't.

We'll talk more later. After you've seen the stuff you haven't seen yet.
I'll explain everything. I promise.

Right now, I have to go and figure out a way to survive the next six
weeks without my friends from Seattle Grace in my life. Maybe I'll form
a support group...

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
