[] From Shonda Rhimes (FINALLY)...

So Denny Duquette died at 7:42 Monday evening.

Actually, he died once on the East coast and once again on the West
coast and I'm pretty sure he's going to die many more times on many more
continents pretty damned soon.

I cried. When Denny died, I cried. I cried when I wrote the script page
where Denny dies. I cried when we had the read through and the cast
found out that Denny dies. I cried when Mark Tinker filmed Denny dying.
I cried when Ed Ornelas edited Denny's death. I cried watching them mix
the song playing during Denny's death. I'm a freaking crybaby when it
comes to Denny.

I choose to blame editor Ed Ornelas for Denny's death. Like I had
nothing to do with it. Like I was an innocent bystander in the whole
thing. Like it wasn't me wrote it. I'd sit behind him in the editing
room and sob into a tissue while saying kindly, supportive things to the
back of Ed's head. Things like "Denny Murderer! Dog Killer!!!
DENNY-MURDERING-DOG-KILLER!!!"

I didn't kill Denny. Ed did.

Right.

Look, I honestly have nothing to say for myself. No words in my own
defense. Except I told you guys that the characters have to do what the
characters have to do. I mean, I love Denny. Really love him. He was my
"you jump, I jump" guy. He was my imaginary future husband. He was the
guy I was dating in my head. HE WAS ALL I HAD. And now he's dead. God, I
feel so Izzie in this moment.

But the point is, Denny was always going to die. His character was
created to die. I knew it. Jeffrey Dean Morgan knew it. And as much as I
wanted Denny NOT to die when the time came, as much Jeffrey Dean Morgan
wanted to NOT die when the time came, as much as Channing Dungey (our
super cool studio executive ) begged me to not to hurt her Denny...

...it was his time. He had a stroke. He died. I had nothing to do with
it. It was his time.

People die. Suddenly. Without warning. When you least expect it. People
die. And it's horrible and painful and utterly shocking but...it
happens. And I wanted to present that on the show.

The good thing is -- and you're all yelling "GOOD THING? GOOD THING?!!!"
-- but, yes, there is a good thing in all of this. And that good thing
is what Camille says to Richard. "I've been loved. I've been loved.
That's something everyone should feel once in their life." Denny has
been loved. And he dies knowing he was loved. And knowing that he loved
back.

I named this episode "Losing My Religion" because, to me, that is what
happens to each intern in this episode. Each intern lets go of the
things they've held onto all season. George lets go of loving Meredith.
Cristina lets go of her well-checked emotions. Izzie is forced to let go
of her idealism. And that leads to her letting go of medicine. Alex lets
go of his rage against Izzie. And Meredith...well, Meredith just lets
go.

I don't want to talk too much about the Mer/Der of it all because we are
clearly hanging on a cliff here and anything I say may tell you what's
on the other side. And you know I hate spoilers. But I do feel like
we've tried to make their relationship complex. Derek's flawed and
sometime you hate him. Meredith's flawed and sometimes you hate her. And
you can't help but root for Addison to be happy. And you like Finn cause
he births ponies and he has plans. And clearly poor Doc was a metaphor
for the Mer/Der relationship and when Doc's put down, it feels like a
horrible, painful but necessary ending. But still...when Derek grabs
Meredith and kisses her...it's such a relief. You want them to figure
this thing out.

I do want to talk about the costumes (done beautifully by Mimi the
costume goddess). Everyone dresses up for the prom. But then we lose
Denny. And here's something you maybe don't notice until all our interns
are gathered in the room with Izzie who lies on the bed with Denny's
body: the prom clothes are actually mourning clothes. Funeral clothes.
Suddenly, you see that Meredith and George and Cristina and Callie and
Alex are all dressed, not for a prom, but for a funeral. Everyone in
dark colors, everyone dressed somberly. As if they were in mourning.
Only Izzie is in happy pink. Only Izzie looks like she didn't know this
was coming. In the last scene, Mark Tinker shot this gorgeous shot of
Izzie walking down the stairs, Alex and George behind her. I love that
shot. Izzie has this fallen queen thing going on that I just adore.

Speaking of the prom...dudes, I so wanted this prom. I've wanted this
prom since the beginning of the season. We'd been planning for it and
obsessing about it. Because, first of all, I like seeing men in suits.
Second, these interns and their lives remind me so much of high school
in all the best ways. I hope you've noticed that. I hope you got the
Breakfast Club of it all when they give their speeches to the Chief.
Cause I'm an 80's girl and I needed my prom.

Burktina: this episode is one of my favorites for both Burke and
Cristina. If you look at where they began at the beginning of Season Two
and how far they've come.... You just hate Cristina. You hate her when
she walks away from Burke after seeing that he know has a hand tremor.
And then you see her give that speech to the Chief (which by the way,
Sandra Oh did brilliantly and perfectly EVERY SINGLE TAKE) and you see
the struggle. Her struggle to suppress all of her humanity in pursuit of
perfection. And in my mind, what we realize is that she is not cold. She
is terrified. Scared that if she lets her emotions out, they will
overtake her and she will be hurt. And you can't hate her. Because it's
so incredibly human and understandable. There's that moment when Burke
tells Cristina that he won't bear a grudge and it's so sad because he
means it. He doesn't believe she has it in her to stay by his side. And
then Denny dies and Cristina watches Izzie grieving and realizes that
she has no other option but to go to Burke and cover his hand with her
own. Because you can lose someone if you're not careful.

There's more to say but I know y'all are itching for me to post this
blog. So I'll do another one later in the week. Because we still have to
talk about the Chief and about Burke's tremors and George and Callie's
thing and so much more...

One last thing: Thank you so much for watching the show. I've been in
New York for the network upfronts and it's been amazing to hear from
fans how much they enjoy the show. It means a lot to me and all of us
who work on Grey's. You may have heard we are moving to Thursday night.
I'm thrilled because Thursday is a big day for TV and I love a challenge
and I've got my fingers and toes crossed that you'll follow us to our
new night.

HEY? ARE YOU STILL OUT THERE?

Okay, okay. I know. I suck. I said I was gonna blog more and I didn't.
It's just that I went home after 27 episodes and lay down on my sofa and
then I...I...

...well...

Alright, I admit it. I started watching TV. Like a fiend. I LOVE TV.
LOVE. I'm a TV junkie. And I never get to watch TV during the season
because I'm busy making TV so I thought I'd just fire up the Tivo and
watch a teeny tiny bit, just a few seconds and...and...well, I fell in.
I fell into TV world.

I fell into this unbelievably brilliant island where this plane has
crashed and there are all these people and they're well, kinda...lost, I
guess you'd say.

Then I fell into this super funny show that is made like a documentary
and all of the people work in this one place which you'd maybe call an
office.

There was also this group of super secret military men and their wives
and no one is supposed to talk about the fact they work in a special
arena called...well, it's a unit.

How good are these shows with only one word titles? WOW.

But I digress.

The point is, I got sucked into OTHER shows. Mainly in an effort to push
the events over at Seattle Grace out of my mind. I'm not over Denny's
death. I thought I was. I was sure I'd be fine by now. But I'm not. I'm
just not. I'm all freaked out. And I'm kinda worried. About Mer and Der.
Because, dear GOD, they had SEX! Really good sex. Great romantic perfect
sex is what it looked like. But he's married. And Addison's all dancing
at the prom and reliving the horror of Skippy Gould talking about Star
Wars and poor Finn's making all kinds of plans and...

...but Mer and Der have this all-consuming love and, I'm sorry, I did a
little dance of joy when he kissed her.

Yeah, I wrote it. But still, when I SAW it in the dailies, when I saw it
ACTUALLY HAPPENING, I did a little dance. Of joy.

But here's a key piece of advice from me to you because there's a
difference between real life and TV and that's this: don't sleep with
married people. Unless they are married to you. Because all-consuming
love doesn't come around all that often. And, in real life, nobody does
a dance of joy when they find out you've been engaging in adultery. Not
even me.

You think about that over the summer. Just in case some super McDreamy
approaches you on the beach and you start feeling all steamy...

Here's a few other things to think about over the long summer break:

The Chief: a lot of things were revealed about about the Chief. My
favorite moment is Meredith leaning forward and saying, "It was you. You
were the reason my parents broke up." And the Chief, all of his secrets
finally spread out for everyone to see, can do nothing but leave the
room. The history of Ellis and Richard, it is long. It is deep. There is
WAY more. But you gotta for wait. Watch for the clues.

Burke's Tremors: yeah, they were there. You saw them. It was a tough
choice to make, maiming a surgeon, maiming BURKE for God's sake, but it
was necessary. What's a hero without a few stumbles? And you know that
it's not the fall that is so interesting. It's watching whether or not
someone chooses to get back up and, when they, how they choose to rise.
That's what we'll be watching for Burke to do -- get up and rise well.

George and Callie: My George, he's been through a lot. He's had sex with
Meredith, had his dreams of love shattered, moved out of the house, cut
his own hair and lived with Burke and Cristina. Callie, strange and odd
and dark as she is, is his chance. His chance to be happy again. Give
the woman the benefit of the doubt. She's flawed and she pees in front
of other people and she likes to crack bones but, guys...? She loves
George. SHE LOVES GEORGE. That recommends her to the highest place of
cool girl in my book. Because she's the only one who sees George for
George. Besides, I love that moment when she's stomping down the hall,
all uncomfortable in her prom dress, cursing her high heels but
determined to go to the Prom. Determined not to be that girl she was in
high school. Callie lays all her emotional crap right out in front of
us, not bothering to hide or pretend she's cynical or hip to fit in. She
defiantly doesn't fit in and her square pegness thrills me.

The Monologues: this was something we'd never done and I wasn't sure
would work. But you place those pages into the hands of the actors and
each and every one of them layered their characters' souls right into
the dialogue. Those monologues -- all grouped together in one act --
tell us more about our characters than we have maybe learned all year.
And they speak to the heart of why Alex, Izzie, George, Cristina and
Meredith are the way they are. They also tell you how this episode is
going to end. If you were really listening, everything was there.

Okay. I am shutting up now. Have a good summer. Get ready for Thursdays
in the fall.

I'll be reading your comments and answering the most frequently asked
questions in the FAQ section of our website.

Thank you!

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
