[] Shonda Rhimes on "Time Has Come Today" and other things...

Welcome to Season Three!!!

We here at Grey's are all really excited about the new season and dear
God, I hope you are too. I personally was itching to get back to work.
I'm not a vacation kind of girl. I'm also clearly not a girl who exists
well outside the four walls of Seattle Grace Hospital. I was missing
George and the gang. So coming back to work was all about joy. But right
now, this minute, today? I'm also kinda nervous.

About Thursday nights.

I wasn't. I was fine. I didn't even feel a twinge. Seriously (sorry for
the unwarranted usage of "seriously" this early in the season). But ---
seriously. I was feeling no pressure, no pain. What a fun job! I love
it! I am a stress-free, happy-go-lucky, glass half full freak of nature!
I mean, I was. The head of ABC Steve McPherson (seriously, would it
surprise you to know that I secretly call him McFee?) was all, "Shonda,
we're moving you to Thursday" and I was all, "Whoo-hoo!" And I got
really super excited. Because Thursday? Is a rocking night for
television. I did some dances of joy.

Then I woke up this morning and, out of nowhere, found myself FREAKED
OUT. Because Thursdays? Is a rocking night for television. And McFee's a
smart man, a brilliant man, a man who has plans (very McVet of him to
have plans, right?) and I trust him because...hello? He has done pretty
damn well by our show thus far. So I trust him. But still...do me a
favor and set your VCRs and your Tivos and most important, plant your
heinies in front of the TV Thursday night at 9 pm and watch. Okay? So I
don't burst a blood vessel in my brain from the stress? Because I really
love Mer and Der and Burktina and Iz and Alex and George and Callie and
Addison and the Chief and Bailey and I'm like this worried Mama whose
kid starts a new school and maybe won't make any friends.

Enough about the freaking and the Thursdays. Let's discuss the thing you
guys wanna know about. Which is what's gonna happen in the first
episode. Ready?

???

Okay, yeah, I can't tell you anything. Not anything in detail. Cause
that takes the fun out of watching. But I've noticed that a lot of you
in the comments section and over on the message boards seem to be
dissecting the promos for clues. And all I have to say is...we are going
places you can't imagine. Or maybe you can imagine but you don't expect.
And I want to tell you, really I do but...well, I'm trying to keep it to
myself.

The first episode is going to take place pretty much where the end of
Season Two left off. Because I don't believe in jumping ahead three
months and leaving people scratching their heads and muttering,
"Dude...what happened while we were away?" I feel like SO much happened
at the end of last season that I owe it to the characters to have them
deal with the aftermath. And I owe it to you to let you watch the
aftermath. Cause Denny died (yeah, I'm still not over that -- I saw Jeff
Dean Morgan a week ago at the DVD release party and almost burst into
tears of joy and hugged him for about ten minutes because it was like
Denny was back and alive and in my arms...but alas, it was just JDM who
is super-cute and incredibly talented and has grown this adorably sexy
scruffy stubble but is, in fact, not actually Denny anymore because
Denny is dead) and Burke got shot and Meredith lost her panties...

Those panties...dude, those panties play a big part in the first couple
of episodes. Those panties are key. Cause Meredith never put them back
on. She rushed out to deal with Izzie and left Derek who was asking
"Meredith, what does this mean?" and she never had a chance to put those
panties back on. So watch for the panties -- and I don't just mean the
shot in the promos that has them on the bulletin board in the hospital.

The first episode (which is called "Time Has Come Today") deals with,
not just the aftermath, but also with the past. I encourage you to watch
the original very first episode of Grey's Anatomy from Season One
because, if you pay attention to the dialogue and the details, you will
be rewarded in this premiere episode with some (hopefully) very
interesting tidbits. And I hate the word "tidbits" but it does describe
what I mean perfectly. This first episode of Season Three is meant to
reward hardcore fans -- it's also meant to bring us to a place where we
can say goodbye to Denny as well as deal with the Mer/Der/Finn of it
all. Just remember that nothing is ever wrapped up easily on this show.
Because things aren't neat and clean in real life.

Here I should stop. I shouldn't say anything more. Because I don't want
to tell you too much. Cause I don't want to ruin it for you.

Watch.

Thursday night.

9 pm (8 pm if you live in the midWest).

Watch and let me know what you think...

More from Shonda on the Season Premiere Episode "Time Has Come Today"...

Original Airdate: 9-22-06

(A word to our Canadian friends: you may not want to read this if you
don't want to know what happens. I'm sorry. I'm so so sorry that
happened to you guys. We can't wait for you to catch up with us next
week. Also, I know many spoilers are being posted out there in web-land
about next week's episode but, you should know, we won't be posting them
here. I can't control what happened but I'm not gonna add to it in any
way...)

So, it's good to finally be able to TALK about the episode instead of
NOT talk about the episode. I have been dying to discuss this with you
all and find out what you think.

This episode for me was really a chance to deal with the things that had
been haunting me all summer. Especially Izzie. I'd been pretty worried
about her, you see. She was in such pain when we left her. And let me
tell you, I watched that final scene in Denny's room where she wouldn't
get out of the bed more times than is probably normal for someone who
WROTE the thing. I couldn't help it -- Katie Heigl's amazing performance
sucks me in every single time.

Anyway, I was worried about Izzie. And I knew that she was going to
really be suffering when we see her again this season. But I wasn't sure
how to make it clear that she was grieving without having a funeral. And
I really didn't want a funeral -- I see them on TV and they never have
the impact that a real funeral does. They never have that surreal,
horrible sinking feeling you get when sitting at the funeral of someone
you care about. There's a distance to a funeral with TV for me. You sit
at a funeral and you find yourself re-living all these moments in time
and regretting things...

Which is why this episode is about time. And being stuck in a moment.

So Izzie is stuck. On the bathroom floor, unable to bring herself to
move. Because taking off that dress? Means Denny is really gone.

George and Derek are stuck in the locker room, quarantined. Where they
end up discussing the merits of love and saying "I love you." George and
Derek are the last two people you'd expect to connect but, here, in this
situation, they do. And I think a wonderfully unexpected parallel is
drawn between George and his feelings for Callie and Derek and his
feelings for Meredith.

Bailey is dealing with Omar who is stuck in a room alone, grieving for
his wife. And she's feeling all the guilt in the world over what
happened to Denny.

Meredith is stuck at home. Taking care of Izzie and feeling trapped by
what happened with Derek.

And Addison is walking around with a pair of black panties in her purse.
Stuck with a group of teenage girls and their parents who won't claim a
newborn baby found in a trash can.

Everyone is stuck. And everyone, EVERYONE, is plagued. By the past.

The flashbacks were something I'd been wanting to do for a while. I
really felt that we needed to see Addison and Derek and the moments
after he discovers her in bed with his best friend Mark. Because what
Addison did to Derek is SO much worse than what happened between
Meredith and Derek in that exam room at the end of the season. I wanted
us to remember that she betrayed him long before he betrayed her. And
that Addison herself is suffering over her choice to have an affair.

I also wanted very badly to reveal the first moment Meredith and Derek
meet. It is the night before the interns' very first shift. And if you
remember the first episode of Season One, there was a mixer that night.
And there's Meredith -- with her (as George described in the pilot)
"black dress, slit up the side, strappy sandals" in the bar. And she
meets Derek. And they are so fresh with one another, it's all so new.
There's none of the baggage that they have now. I just love when
Meredith says "so if I know you, I'll love you?" so SURE that she never
will. That he's just another guy. And when Derek asks Meredith what her
story is, she says "I'm just a girl in a bar." And we KNOW that she's
not -- we know about her mother and her daddy issues and her soft spot
for sleeping with inappropriate men. But here, she's just a girl. And
Derek says he's just a guy. But, unlike the first episode of Grey's
Anatomy, we know about his wife. And we just saw his pain at discovering
Addison's infidelity. And this is the "split second", the moment they
meet, that has changed the course of their lives forever.

It was a conscious choice on my part to not show Burke until the end
except for the flashback at the mixer. Because I wanted you to watch the
episode and either a) pine for his presence or b) forget about him --
until Cristina walks into his room at the end of the day. Then I wanted
the power of what he means to Cristina to overwhelm us when he asks her
how she is and then she begins to cry.

"Don't ever die" is one my favorite Cristina lines ever. Look at how
much she's changed since that night at the mixer.

Richard and Ellis and Adele -- the relationships are changing. You only
(purposely) get a taste of what's to come in this episode but I think it
is a potent taste. To have Adele walk out on the Chief...what is he
gonna do?

And finally, I just want to talk about Callie and her "high school with
scalpels" speech: Y'all know how much I love Callie. And how much I love
how she loves George. It was really fun to be able to give her these
words because it is what I've been saying is part of the premise for
this show all along -- these people are socially stuck in high school
because they've been science geeks for so long.

Okay, my brain is fried from the stress of hoping people watched the
premiere so I'm going to stop writing now. Maybe I'll write more later
after I read your thoughts.

Thank you for watching. Thank you for checking back in with us. I've
gotta get back to work so you all have some more episodes to watch!!!

The last thing I'm gonna say for now...

A lot of you wrote to protest that I didn't talk about McVet's statement
to Mer or about McDreamy's "I love you." So, here goes...

Oooh, wait!! Can I just tell you that, last night, McDreamy told me he
loved ME? Okay, not so much McDreamy as Patrick Dempsey and not so much
"me" as "working on the show" but still...my heart skipped a little beat
just the same to have him utter the words in that voice of his. That man
says "I love you" better than anyone on the planet. But he's married. In
real life. And on the show. As much as we like to fantasize, we all have
to remember that...

Anyway, I was proud of Finn. I was proud of the fact that he comes over
to say that he and Meredith aren't exclusive. He's pissed but they're
not exclusive. Because, honestly, he doesn't know what happened in that
exam room. He doesn't even know there WAS an exam room. And he really is
a good guy, a strong guy, a guy who feels something for a woman for the
first time since his wife's death. I like that he's not petty or easily
made jealous. I like that he's confident enough to stick. And I LOVE
that he says that Derek is bad for her and he (Finn) is a good thing.
There is some truth to it. Given the history of Mer/Der. And Finn is a
rescuer-guy. You know, rescuer-guys, right? They're the ones who are
determined to break through the scary/damaged barrier we dark and twisty
girls put up. They're the real thing, rescuer-guys are the guys you
marry.

The guys you should marry. But then there are the Dereks of the world...

Let me say a little something about McDreamy men. They are scary and
damaged themselves. They carry a little bit of tortured soul in them.
But they mean well. And they're honest. And they're so, so, so darn
tempting. Especially when they stand in your kitchen say "I just...I
love you. I have loved you...forever." How in the world are we supposed
to say no to that? We should. We should send them packing.
But...SERIOUSLY?

And so Meredith is left with this choice. Between what her brain knows
she should do and what her heart wants her to do. And while it seems
obvious and easy, it's absolutely not. Finn has plans. And Derek's got a
wife. And there's the choice to be healthy and mature and whole and the
choice to jump off the cliff. And no one jumps off a cliff without a
parachute if they know what is good for them. Plus, it's not like she
doesn't have feelings for Finn. She definitely has feelings for Finn.
And I know Derek says that he loves her but he says it about twenty
episodes too late.

She stood there and said "pick me, choose me, love me." She begged him.
BEGGED him in the most humble, humiliating, soul-baring way possible.
And he chose Addison. He walked away and chose Addison.

That would give any girl pause. Major, major pause.

Meredith's pausing.

She's hit the pause button.

But, don't worry, I'm not dragging this out all season. I'm not gonna
drag it out very long at all. I like to move things forward.

I like to take my finger off the pause button and see what happens next.

Okay, that's all for now. Because I have get back to writing episodes...

-Shonda

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
