[] Debora Cahn on "Sometimes a Fantasy"

Original Airdate: 10-5-06

So I'm one of the new kids. There are some new writers on Grey's this
year, and at the beginning, being the new kid felt alarmingly like it
did when I was nine and went to sleep-away camp with a bunch of girls
who had Jordache jeans and I didn't have Jordache jeans and I was really
convinced it was going to be the end for me. Everyone here on the staff
was incredibly sweet and welcoming, and yet still I had major "What the
hell do I wear today" anxieties, and "Oh my god, I just spoke a sentence
that used the word 'like' fourteen times" anxieties, and... all the
anxieties really. I had them all. You'd think that past age 30 you kind
of get that crap under control. Apparently not. So be patient with my
blog, because it's my first blog, and I don't know what I'm doing.

The nervous condition came and went over the first weeks on the job, but
I think I officially got over it dealing with Cristina and the chicken.
Cristina's decided she's going to help Burke get back on the horse after
his hand surgery, (so sweet, so generous, so unexpected from Cristina)
and she's going to do it by having him practice operating on dead
chickens. So when it came time to shoot the episode, there were long
conversations with the fantastic production team about the hacking of
the chicken. Was it just a chicken breast? Was it a whole fryer? The
folks from sets and props had to design a cutting board that could be
built into Burke's counter top, so it wouldn't fly off the counter, as
there was a lot of concern about Sandra Oh getting hit in the face with
either a meat cleaver or a chicken. The conversation continued when we
hit the stage to rehearse the move with Sandra. Could she get through
the bird in one hack or would it take two? (I thought it should be one.
It was important to me. I don't know why.) We had rehearsal chickens. We
had stunt chickens. We discovered that the stunt chickens, which had
balloons inside them instead of bones, emitted some sort of evil stinky
salmonella gas that threatened to kill Sandra on the spot. It was scary.
In the end, she made it through in one incredibly satisfying hack. The
whole thing just made me really happy.

That and the threesome, which was pretty happy-making too. I think if I
was having a dream about being in bed with Derek Shepherd and Finn
Dandridge, and my roommate woke me up, I'd come at him with a
salmonella-coated meat cleaver. The dream scene, which turned out so
beautifully, was a riot on the stage. Ellen and Chris and Patrick
couldn't stop laughing. Not for a minute. And yet it came out looking so
dreamy and idyllic. And even after the dream, Meredith is so optimistic,
so idyllically happy about the prospect of dating two men at the same
time. It never worked for me -- dating more than one guy at a time. I'm
married now, and so I look back fondly on my playing the field days, but
it was always a nightmare when there was more than one person in the
mix. I couldn't keep it all straight. I couldn't remember what I said to
whom, and who had told me the story about putting a dead cat in their
freezer. It wasn't dreamy and idyllic, it was stressful. And yet
Meredith seems to handle it so well. Better than the guys, certainly,
who get so wrapped up in the competition, they can't seem to focus on
the girl.

And then there's George, who's so focused on the girl he can't think
straight. But not in a good way. She's in his space. It's one of those
you-don't-have-a-place-to-live-and-we-sleep-together-half-the-time-anyway-so-why-don't-you-move-in-with-me
impulse moves that are always a terrible idea. Terrible. And yet it
happens all the time. Particularly in places like New York, where the
rent is through the roof, and so it seems totally reasonable to ditch
your crappy 6th floor walk-up that you share with three friends and
somebody's unemployed cousin Waldo and move in with your new dude, even
though you've only had three dates, and you're not sure what his last
name is. I've been there. It's a crappy idea. It never would have
occurred to George and Callie to shack up that early in the
relationship. But she was homeless and it seemed like the polite thing
to do, and suddenly he's made the offer and backing out of it seems rude
and horribly cruel, and yet he can't handle this. And so he's a basket
case all day. TR's performance of "Robin, he just marches into the
Batcave, like, here I am, give me some tights, I'm gonna borrow your
towel" could not have been more fabulous.

And how about Supergirl? First of all, I still can't believe we landed
Little Miss Sunshine. Abigail Breslin may be the best actor I've ever
seen. She's ten, or nine, or some young age where she shouldn't be the
best actor anyone's ever seen and yet she's amazing. And how adorable is
Alex with her? Just when you thought you couldn't fall any more in love
with him in, suddenly he's being nice to children and it's all over.

But my favorite thing might be Addison slapping Mark. It was Shonda's
idea. I thought she was insane. I said, "She's trying to let him down
easy, he just flew across the country to scratch her itch, she's buried
her about-to-be-divorcee devastation in his very well defined chest,
he's proclaiming his true love, she can't slap him in the face." And
Shonda replied, "Yes. She can." And so it went in the script, and sure
enough, Shonda was right. It was amazing. Kate Walsh pulled it off
brilliantly. She's as surprised as he is, when it happens. It's a panic
move. She smacks him because if she doesn't, she'll just kiss him again,
and then her clothes'll be off again, right there on the floor of Joe's
Bar, and she can't have that, she has to get on with her life.

Izzie's trying to get on with her life too, in an incredibly valiant
way. But she can't. It was heartbreaking, watching her standing outside
that hospital all day. It was 95 degrees out when we shot it, and she's
wearing Denny's sweater, so on top of the emotional devastation, we were
a little worried Katie Heigl was going to pass out. Katie was fine. But
Izzie was wrecked. She thought that she could take back her life,
through sheer force of will, but it's too much. We all wanted her to
walk through that door. We all wanted to believe that she could bounce
back. Still be a doctor. Be a superhero. Step out of the wreckage, brush
herself off, and walk on. But she can't.

It was incredible to watch, and incredible to be a part of. I'm still
nervous most of the time, convinced that at any moment they're going to
turn to me and say "You, you don't belong here, away with you." But
until that happens, it's a great ride.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
