[] Stacy McKee on "Let the Angels Commit"

Original airdate: 11/2/06

You know what's funny? I've been sitting here for a good -- oh -- hour
at least (which, by the way, means it's gone from being bright and sunny
to darkity dark dark outside, all by what? 5:00pm? I'm just going to say
it. I officially hate daylight savings time) grappling with how to start
this week's writers blog.

It's funny, because I actually blog with you guys every week (I also
write the Grey's Nurse's Blog, for those of you who don't know) and I
usually have NO trouble at all coming up with all sorts of fun things to
say, only... I just realized -- the reason I'm having so much trouble
tonight is... I can't hide behind a character. I know exactly what Nurse
Debbie would say about this episode ("Hello. What is this -- Bring Your
Snarky Sister To Work Day or what???")

But tonight... I have to simply write this blog as... Me.

Jeesh. It's a lot of pressure, people!

So -- after watching my episode again (looking for inspiration), then
watching the sun go down outside (again, looking for inspiration) -- it
hit me. There's really only one way to get this blog started---

I have to be Ham.

I am ham, and I am committed to dish with you about this deliciously
murky, incredibly dark and twisty episode. H. A. M. -- Ham.

Now, let's talk about Meredith and Derek. I'm sure you all noticed they
don't have a lot of face time in this episode -- but, put yourself in
Meredith's position. How COULD they? She broke up with Finn. Then she
told Derek that... she broke up with Finn. And now -- she's waiting --
has BEEN waiting for Derek to, in some way, react to her news about
dearly departed ex-boy-toy Finn!!! Suddenly she's single; he's single.
Finally. They have a real chance at being together and -- there's a
McHottie in Derek's bed.

Ok, so it's his sister, but whatever.

If I were Meredith -- there's really no way I'd be able to do anything
right now but bite my nails, try to focus on work, avoid the HECK out of
Derek and spend way too much time over analyzing things with my closest
friends, only... Meredith can't even do that. Because her closest
friend, Cristina, is dealing with her own crazy problems, so...

It brings us to one of my very favorite (heartbreaking though it is)
moments between Meredith and Derek. When they finally run into each
other, after a very long gut wrenching day. Derek finally fesses up to
the fact that he hasn't so much as even called Meredith -- but he should
have. (Damn right he should.) And Meredith -- trying so very hard to
keep herself together, not to cry or scream or whatever it is you DO in
that situation -- the situation in which Derek SO SHOULD HAVE CALLED --
and she says, simply: "But you didn't." God, that moment kills me every
time. It just breaks my heart because -- by not calling, Derek has said
so much more to her than he ever could have said in a conversation. He's
shown Meredith that he has things to sort out. He's shown her he's not
necessarily ready to move forward with her right now. He's shown her the
very thing she realizes, right there in the stairwell -- that despite
all this being newly single-ness... Derek needs some space.

So, in that moment, Meredith gives it to him. And don't you just know
that it kills her inside to do so, but... that's what it means to be
Ham. You just have to commit to something. Whether you want to or not.

Now -- as for Derek, I for one really enjoy seeing him with his sister.
It's fun, frankly, to watch him interact with a woman he ISN'T sleeping
with. And it's just so nice to get a glimpse of who he must be at home,
with his family -- with all of his sisters -- as a brother. The line
where Derek tells Nancy that she sounds more and more like Mom everyday?
Yeah, my brother's said that to me a few times. And the part where
Addison and Mark watch Nancy leave -- and they sigh to themselves about
how much they miss her? Can't you just picture what the pre-Seattle
Shepherd family holidays must have been like? Don't you just KNOW it's a
blast to hang out at their place? I LOVE how Nancy gives us this teeny
tiny window into the family that helped turn McDreamy into McDreamy.

Ok -- now I have to take a moment to talk about Bailey. Holy crap -- the
look on her face at the end of this episode? Killer. But the part that
the ham in me HAS to talk about -- is the exchange Bailey has with
Burke, after the Humpty Dumpty surgery, when Burke (backed into a corner
and with absolutely no choice) is forced to tell Bailey that he "just
couldn't use" her. Burke -- Burke of ALL people -- should have Bailey's
back, and yet -- he says something like that. And Bailey, of course,
thinks she knows exactly what Burke means -- because Bailey said the
exact same thing to Izzie Stevens earlier in the day.

Bailey doesn't trust Stevens. Bailey is disappointed in Stevens. Bailey
doesn't even really want to work with Stevens (remember when Bailey
questions the Chief about putting Izzie back on her service?) So to
Bailey? It's like Burke must feel that exact same way about her -- it's
just horrible. For Bailey, for Burke.

Until that final moment when Bailey sees Cristina writing and erasing
things on that OR board.... And it hits her. There's more to this than
meets the eye. Which tells us all that clearly -- things are about to
get even more horrible for Cristina.

Oh, Cristina. Seattle Grace's own Lady Macbeth... what can I say about
Cristina? She's (barely) holding it all together. She and Burke have
started this thing -- they have become a team, a well oiled machine,
only... how long do they really think they can keep something like this
up? Theirs is a temporary fix to potentially very big problem... they've
barely been able to put their system into place and already, it's
beginning to unravel. But the thing to remember is this -- Cristina is
the definition of Ham. She is doing precisely what she has to do to
protect Burke -- whether it earns her points or burns bridges with her
friends or her colleagues -- she's doing what it takes. Because she's
committed.

Alright -- it occurs to me that, by being such a committed piece of ham,
I've managed to write a very long blog already, and I still haven't been
able to address many MANY of our other characters. SO -- quickly --

Izzie understands Gretchen (The Crazy Burn Girl) so well, because that
speech, where Gretchen talks about only being known as one thing, as a
failure? Izzie gets that in SUCH a big way -- I mean, here she is,
finally at work, and she isn't even allowed to touch a patient because
the last time she did, it was Denny. Talk about only being known for one
thing? All anyone at Seattle Grace knows Izzie as is "The Intern Who
Quit After Killing Her Boyfriend." Izzie has a lot to prove -- just like
Gretchen. Luckily for us -- Izzie's journey doesn't wind up with IZZIE
being committed...

And George & Callie. Poor poor Callie -- I'm on her side, folks. The
girl's so damn in love with George. And he's blown her off over and over
and now that she's finally really truly broken things off with him-- NOW
George decides he's the Pig? Is he kidding? Could his timing be any
worse?

There's a reason so many people (including our characters) have a fear
of commitment. It's a tricky thing. It usually comes at a cost -- and
sometimes that cost can be very high.

Or in the case of this particular blog, far too wordy. So this me,
signing off for the night, hoping you enjoyed tonight's episode-- and,
btw -- don't look for Debbie's Blog right now -- I'm sure I won't be
posting it until tomorrow... After all, even Ham has to sleep some time!

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
