[] Mark Wilding on "Where the Boys Are"

Original Airdate: 11-09-06

Mistakes. I've decided to talk about mistakes. My mistakes. The
characters' mistakes. And the mistakes I made which led to the
characters' mistakes. Already you're probably thinking "What?? Can't I
just enjoy this blog without the stupid build-up?" The answer is no.
Don't worry. Read on. It'll become clearer. Last night's episode was
called "Where the Boys Are". Which was my first mistake.

When I suggested that song title to the writers' room, I got a lot of
blank stares. The Connie Francis song, I said. You know...Someone waits
for me? A smiling face, a warm embrace? Two arms to hold me tenderly?
And, pushing on -- despite all the puzzled looks from my fellow writers,
the people who I thought would at least pretend to be supportive -- I
told them that what made the title so VERY, VERY clever is that the
episode's about where the boys literally are and where they are
emotionally. See? Pretty clever, right? Right?? Again, more blank
stares. Connie who? Okay. My first mistake. Pitching very old songs to a
very young writers' room.

And now for my second mistake. Or at least what I thought was my second
mistake. Seattle. Yes, those pictures on your TV screen really were
Seattle. That Space Needle in the background when Derek's sticking the
Chief's suitcase in his Jeep-looking vehicle? That's the real Space
Needle. We didn't CGI it or go to LAX and shoot that futuristic looking
restaurant that may or may not revolve and that could maybe look like
the Space Needle if you were flying at ten thousand feet and there was
enough smog that day. And the woods? Those are REAL SEATTLE WOODS.

I know because I was there. And I insisted that we fly up a crew and
they be there too. Because I thought it was really, really important
that the woods look like Seattle woods -- with their towering pines and
moss-covered trees and mountains covered in clouds. As opposed to the
eucalyptus trees and dry brush and blue skies that you tend to find in
your basic L.A. forests.

On my first visit to the place, though, it rained. Hard. Really hard.
And living in L.A. where you think the weather in other parts of the
country must somehow be just like L.A., I didn't exactly come prepared.
I wore a cotton shirt, flimsy golf jacket (no hood) and sneakers. Yes.
BIG MISTAKE. BIG STUPID MISTAKE. I was freezing cold and soaking wet
before it was even 11:00 o'clock in the morning. And even though the
water dripping off my face looks like it could be tears, it really was
just rain. I want to clear that up because there's a video of a soaking
wet me that circulated around the Grey's offices for the better part of
a week. I wasn't crying. Okay? Still. Letting someone film me? A very
bad mistake. And the thought did cross my mind -- if only for a second
-- is shooting in the rainy Seattle woods really the best idea? Or was
it a mistake?

Then I was saved. Our extraordinary line producer Rob Corn made it all
happen. We found the locations. We shot great stuff. And there was next
to no rain (great job Rob!). Plus, all the outdoor stuff looks FANTASTIC
(great job director Dan Minahan and great job, Director of Photography,
Herb Davis!). So, to quote Ronald Reagan, "Mistakes were made." But Rob
Corn saved me from those mistakes! Thank you again, Rob.

And now onto the actual episode...

My next mistake might have been the theme of the episode. It was
Outside/In. Thinking you can recognize a problem by what's on the
outside while somehow underestimating or not recognizing what's going on
inside. Yeah. That's a lot to bend your mind around. For example --
Jamie's a healthy-looking young girl on the outside; on the inside she
has a dead baby. Donna isn't happy being a man. She wants to undergo the
final step in becoming a woman so that she can finally have her outsides
match her insides. And then there's Derek, who thinks that being outside
in the woods will help him with his inner turmoil.

Don't get me wrong. Outside/In was a serviceable theme. But it might
have been a mistake. A better theme might have been "couples". Because,
it turns out the episode revolves around couples and how happy or
unhappy they are. I didn't really notice this until Shonda mentioned the
idea of couples while we were in editing. So now I'm running with it.
Because, hey, it's Shonda. It'd be a mistake not to.

So. In no particular order. Our couples --

Ted and Jamie -- the couple with the stillborn baby. A happy couple. She
slipped and fell in the shower. She made a mistake. We never actually
answer the question of whether that led to the death of the baby.
Because, at the end of the day, that didn't seem as important as what
she and Ted actually have to go through.

Vicky and her transgender husband Donna. An unhappy couple. Donna thinks
what Vicky's doing is a big mistake. Deep down, she really doesn't want
her to do it. And she ends up staying with Donna because that's what
makes her happy.

Joe and Walter. Another happy couple. Although by the end of the trip,
Walter clearly thinks it was a mistake to have gone camping with these
guys. By the way, that scene at the river with Richard talking to Joe
and realizing how much they have in common? We almost didn't shoot that
scene because we had a full shooting schedule and I wasn't sure if we
needed it. And not shooting that? That would have been a TERRIBLE
MISTAKE. It's one of my favorite scenes in the episode.

Richard and Adele. "I miss my wife". What more do you have to say?

Addison and Callie. A surprising couple. That scene where they're both
sitting together on the floor at the end was another one of my
favorites.

Cristina and Burke. Burke's not happy with Cristina and how she's coming
to dominate his life. That's why the camping trip. But he sees the
anguish that George is putting himself through with Callie and thinks he
may have been a little rough on Cristina. Which was a mistake. He
returns and they're reconciled. At least for now...

Derek and Burke. An unlikely couple. Derek thought it would just be the
two of them getting away to the mountains and now all these other bozos
are tramping along after them. And at the end of the day, being in the
great outdoors didn't really solve anything. Except to help him realize
how foolish it was to come out here in the first place. And Burke's not
that nice to him until the end when he offers to talk about Mark Sloan.
Which doesn't make them a couple but makes them friends... of a sort.

Mark and Meredith. Mark spends the whole episode telling Meredith that
they'd make a better couple than she and Derek. And Meredith's maybe a
little tempted but...talk about mistakes. That's certainly one she's not
about to make. Is it? Which leads us to...

Meredith and Derek. Who wind up together at the end of the episode. And
as much as he thought he needed space, at the end, he's where he's
always wanted to be. Pressed up against Meredith. With next to no space
between them...

As for me, the next time I go to Seattle I'm bringing layers. Lots and
lots of layers. Some mistakes you only need to make once...

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
