[] "Six Days" with Krista Vernoff...

Original Airdate: 1-11-07

The first thing I wanna say is, my three least favorite words in
television are "To Be Continued." Truly. I hate it and I'm so sorry to
have done it to you. It was not my intention. I wrote this episode as
one hour. But we shot it and it came in at 61 minutes and we only get 43
minutes per hour and so we were faced with the choice of either cutting
18 minutes -- which really would have just destroyed the episode -- or
shooting 4 more days and making it a two-parter. It hurt. It was painful
and laborious and I was terrified that the decision to go two hours
would compromise the episode creatively and it really was such a
beautiful episode at 61 minutes... Anyway, we did what we had to do, and
I think that in the end, we made it work as two hours and I hope that
you don't hate us too much for making you wait a week for the pay-off.
It's worth it, I promise.

Here's the thing though. There's just not that much I can talk about in
this blog without giving away stuff that happens next week. I could tell
you how much I love the stuff you've seen and how much I think you'll
enjoy where it's all going but... I'm thinking maybe instead I'll save
any further discussion of "Six Days" till next week and use this time to
talk about some questions you guys have been writing us. (Also, I did
the podcast this week -- so if you aren't technophobic, like me, and you
actually know how to download and listen to a podcast , you can hear me
and Susan, our wonderful editor, talk about this week's episode in
detail.)

What I want to talk about first is reruns. Yes, there've been a lot
lately and I know it sucks. We had been scheduled to air a new episode
on January 4th but when Six Days became a two-parter, it became
impossible to write, shoot and edit all the new scenes and get something
on the air by January 4th. The GOOD thing about the change is -- we were
going to air a new episode on January 4th then have another repeat on
1/11. So -- yes, you had to wait an extra week for a new episode, but
you will now have 7 WEEKS IN A ROW of new episodes. Yeay. We hope you
enjoy each and every one of them. We do know how frustrating the repeats
can be, but if you break down the math -- that the TV season is 40 weeks
long and that we can only physically produce 24 episodes in a season --
well, there's gonna be a lot of repeats. That's just the way it goes.

Second, I want to talk about the process -- as in -- how and why we do
the things we do because a lot of you have been asking. Here's how it
works: at the end of season two, we spent about 5 weeks discussing
season three -- really planning out all the arcs for the whole season.
Then we went on a 5 week hiatus and when we came back, we started
breaking story (which is what we call outlining episodes.) As we break
story, we usually veer from what we had planned either a little or a
whole, whole lot. Because sometimes things that work in theory do not
work in execution and sometimes things that we think are BRILLIANT by
7pm on a Friday seem absurd by 9am on Monday. It's not a perfect
process, it's not a linear process, it's a creative process. And that
process sometimes involves Shonda sitting up in bed at three a.m. having
had an epiphany that completely destroys all of our plans but ultimately
works out really well for the season. Or sometimes, we read a script and
think it isn't working and sit and try to brainstorm ways to make it
work and we come up with major story points that way.

For example, in "Break on Through" last season, Izzie having given up a
baby for adoption was never discussed in the writers' room. I read the
script and felt like it was missing a personal connection and I went to
Shonda and the writer of the episode and said "what if Izzie had a baby
she gave up for adoption" and they liked it so we put it into the script
and put the script out and the writing staff was as surprised as Katie
Heigl was because sometimes we get so far behind and so tired we forget
to even put out a memo saying, hey, by the way, Izzie gave a baby up for
adoption. (And that, my friends, is what we call a run-on sentence. High
Schoolers reading this should NOT, I repeat NOT, try to learn anything
from my syntax.) My point is, we work hard, we plan things and then just
as in life, plans change and it's one of the things I love about writing
for TV. Plus we have a phenomenal writing staff -- they roll with the
punches and very rarely burst into inappropriate tears when things
change at the 11th hour. (Usually, these days, it's me bursting into
inappropriate tears but that's because I'm very pregnant and wow, those
hormones are killer. Greg Yaitanes, who directed "Six Days" parts one
and two, stopped calling me Krista and just started calling me "Pregnant
Lady." As in, "Hey, Pregnant Lady, here's what I'm thinking of doing
with this scene." One might hear that as patronizing, but after spending
12, 13, 15 hours a day with me for three and half weeks shooting these
episodes and watching me burst frequently into inappropriate tears, I
felt he had earned the right. But really -- which of you didn't cry
after George saw his dad post-op for the first time and shaking, grabbed
Mer's arm and said "He's my Dad, He's my Dad." ?? The problem is I burst
out crying ON THE SET which ...y'know...inappropriate.) Okay, I digress.
I was talking about process.

I have heard it asked repeatedly how much influence you fans have on our
storytelling. And I know one of the writers blogged that what y'all have
to say carries a lot of weight in the writers' room. And I think to a
degree that's true. And by that I mean, we read your comments -- maybe
not all of them but a lot of them -- and sometimes we use them as a
jumping off place for discussion in the room. Like, "A lot of fans don't
like this character right now. Why is that?" We talk about the character
and the things he or she has been doing and where we want to go -- we
also usually discuss the fact that, for every fan who doesn't like a
character, there's one who does. That's one of the things I love about
our show -- that it is polarizing. (I used to have an acting teacher who
said, "If the audience is on their feet at the end of the play, you've
done your job. If the audience is booing and throwing stuff at you at
the end of the play, you've also done your job. What you never want is
to receive "polite" applause.) If our characters were less flawed, if
say, they were just plain sweet and likable, then you would all agree
that you liked them and then where would we go? How much growth is
possible in a character who never makes bad decisions? How much drama is
possible if people are never f**ked up, never bitchy, never raw?
So...our discussions that are prompted by your feedback often lead us
down interesting paths, but they never end with us going, "Yeah, some of
the fans don't like that, we should just stop it." Ever. Because it's
our to keep you on the edge of your seats, it's our job to inspire you
to write us in a feverish rage, it's our job to sometimes piss you off
and hopefully, always, to keep you coming back for more.

Speaking of coming back for more...I have to go do work now -- the
writers' room is calling. So, because I dedicated this blog to giving
you some answers -- I will read and answer the first five questions you
write me after reading this. (As long as you aren't asking me to reveal
future story points cause you know I can't do that.) Okay? And then next
week, I promise, I will talk about 6 days, parts one and two in great
detail. Alright then, Happy New Year. I hope this finds you all healthy
and happy and loving your lives.

More soon,

Krista

(oh, and P.S, I wanted to say thanks to those of you who went to see my
play in NYC. It was an honor and a privilege to meet some of you and I
so appreciated your support!)

Krista returns with answers to your questions...

As promised, here are the first five questions answered. And, because I
have a boatload of work to do and am not in the mood to do any of it, I
answered a few more of the frequently asked questions. Enjoy!

Who is your favorite Greys character and why?

Hmm. I don't know. I think I would have to say that George is the person
who reminds me most of the people I choose to hang out with in my life.
He's smart and gentle and kind and y'know , a little messed up and
passive-aggressive, but he deeply cares about his friends and family. I
like him a lot. In terms of writing, my favorite character to write for
is Bailey. And that's because of her rhythms -- she speaks in long,
almost poetic speeches (we call them Bailey" arias"). She's also funny
and sharp and pointed and direct at the same time. I think she could've
been a preacher if she hadn't become a surgeon. Anyway, her arias are
really fun to write.

How different is this season to what you had originally planned?

In some ways, with some characters, it's exactly as we planned. With
others it's vastly different. I can't talk about too much of it ,
because a lot of the stuff we had planned that fell away might come back
as future story. But to give you an example of how and why things
change, I will tell you that when we planned the season we had not
planned to bring Izzie back to work nearly as soon as we did. But what
happened is this: we were watching the early episodes and what we found
was that we desperately missed having Izzie at the hospital, hanging
with to the interns. She has such a unique spirit, such a unique energy,
and the interns felt (to us) out of balance without her. Tony and Joan
and Zoanne wrote SIX DRAFTS of an Izzie arc for episode five this year
("Oh, the Guilt") -- and none of them were working. And they are
terrific writers and so what we realized is that the reason the stories
didn't work, is because we were tired of having Izzie out of the
hospital, separate from her friends. So three days before that episode
was set to shoot -- we had to completely re-break and rewrite it. It's
the one where Izzie goes to the hospital to clean out her locker and
ends up seeing the Denny Duquette M and M and then hangs out all day and
sees Cristina doing a running whip stitch and knows she wants to come
back to work. Can you imagine how much work it was to integrate Izzie
into that episode that late in the game? Again, our writers are rock
stars. Cause the thing is, when we pulled that story thread, it wasn't
just that episode that unraveled. There was an episode set to start prep
three days later, there was an episode in script stage, an episode in
outline stage and an episode on the board in the writers' room. ALL of
those episodes were affected by that decision. It was a MOUNTAIN of work
-- many, many 12, 13, 14 hour days. But it was worth it because it was
the right call. I don' t know if that answers your question -- but
hopefully it gives you a little more insight into the process which I
think is what you're looking for.

Why was the old Addison elevator scene from Yesterday showed in this
episode? I was like WTF!

Wow. You have an incredibly good eye. This question is referencing the
montage in act six -- in which we stole a shot of Addison from Season 2
("Yesterday"). The reason is that, again, making this episode into two
parts was like guerrilla filmmaking -- on the fly, and just kind of
insane. And that montage wasn't scripted until late the last night
before the last day of shooting. Greg Yaitanes, the director, and I were
talking and we were frustrated because we didn't feel we had a
satisfying ending for part one. And we came up with the montage idea.
And I frantically called Rob Corn, our line producer and begged him to
make it possible. And then I cut a scene that was supposed to shoot the
next day and ran back to my office and scripted the montage and Rob
rearranged the schedule and made it happen cause he's a miracle worker
like that. And the one shot we were unable to get in the way we wanted
on that last day was Addison. So we stole footage from an old episode
(which, by the way, we have done more than once before.) And you totally
busted us. Welcome to TV -- this is how the magic happens.

Why is this episode called "6 days?"

Because it spans over six days (whereas an average episode of Grey's
spans over one or maybe two days). You have seen 3 of the six so far --
and you can track them by the Mer/Der waking up scenes which start each
new day.

You mentioned the decision to extend this episode into a two-parter. How
exactly do you make that work, as you say, "without compromising the
creativity"? Do you add to existing storylines, or actually add in new
scenes? Or, did you alter the original 61 minute editing, and
incorporate more of already shot scenes?

We took the story back the writer's room. We break each episode as six
acts. So our task was to take six acts and make them twelve. We made
twelve columns on the dry erase boards and put act one on act one and
put what had been act 6 on act 12. Then we put all the scenes we had
already shot on the board -- and we talked about what we could add. We
knew we needed approximately 20 scenes and 20 pages of new material. We
watched the 61 minute version -- the whole staff -- and then talked
about which storylines could use fleshing out. The other thing worth
noting is that we had one day to re-break the scenes, and then I had one
day (the next day) to write them. We were here till 11pm that night but
by the time we went home we had added twenty new scenes. Did I mention
how much the writing staff rocks? I have to say, some of the new scenes
are some of my favorite scenes in the episode. Like that scene where
Callie tries to start down George while he's waiting for word on his Dad
-- that was new. The scene at the beginning where George drops the check
on the floor and begs Izzie to deposit it was new. So, at the end of
several very long days, I think it worked out well. (By the way, I'm
only talking about the writing process here -- this was a monumental
task for everyone -- the actors, the editors, the crew, the director and
producers and post -- everyone. It takes a village to raise an episode.
)

I know you guys have in-house medical counsel (in one of your writers,
at least) who consult on the show - is that all you use, or do you use
any of the pro agencies that exist? (I know of two offhand, one by the
CDC and one by... people's whose name I forget, but I'm sure there are
more.)

We use every resource imaginable. The CDC has come to talk to us. So
have many doctors and nurses and organizations. Plus our wonderful
Director of Research, Elizabeth Klaviter, has several prominent surgeons
on speed dial. No fewer than 3 medical professionals comb through and
correct every script we write.

Okay, that was five...here's a few more.

Did George know what really happened in the operating room and how bad
his dad really is at the end of the episode because he seemed so sad,
especially after the whole scene with Callie.

Very astute question. George is a doctor. He knows how bad this thing is
with his Dad and even though the urine output is good which means the
kidneys are functioning, he knows these things can turn on a dime. When
you have a family member in the hospital, there are high highs and low
lows and they come tumbling right on top of each other. George knows
that even if his dad pulls through post-op, he has months of horrible
chemo and radiation ahead of him. And he keeps a brave face for his
family, so when he has a moment alone, he lets the fear creep in. That's
how I see it anyway.

When you introduce a story point (ie Izzy's baby), do you then come up
with a plan for when you will readdress the point? I know you won't tell
us exactly how or when we'll find out new information, but we will find
it out. Right? Please?

We plant seeds. We plant seeds and then let them grow. Some grow
quickly, like dandelions, Some grow slowly -- like -- I'm not a gardener
but what grows slowly? Trees? Roses? Anyway, everything comes back
around. Everything blooms. And the garden is generally more beautiful
for the wait. That's what the gardeners tell me anyway.

Where have Meredith's voice-overs gone? They were a "Grey's" staple --
and made the show compelling and rich -- and I'm missing them!

The voice-over is not gone from the show -- just from tonight's episode
and next week's. Just as we had George do the voiceover once and
Cristina do it once, we decided it would be okay to not have it for
once. (And then of course, the episode became a 2-parter and so we won't
have it twice.) The reason I didn't write one is because I always save
the VO for last -- I write the script first and then write the VO. When
I had written this script, I didn't feel that I had any more to say. It
was a creative decision. Also, I know there was no opening VO on
Carolina's episode awhile back -- but she did write one -- the problem
there was the episode was running long, and we ended up cutting the
opening scene and then there was nowhere to place the VO. So, as you can
see, sometimes decisions are made for sound creative reasons, sometimes
for necessary technical reasons. Anyway, fear not, the VO will be back!

Have you guys ever gotten ideas from fan RPGs? I help run one, and we
swear sometimes you guys read it.

I'm so sorry, but I don't know what a fan RPG is so I think I can safely
say we don't get ideas there.

Whatever happened to Doc's burial? Or is this like Pet Sematary, and
Doc's not really dead?

Same thing that happened to Dylan the bomb squad guy's funeral and Denny
Duquette's funeral. Shonda doesn't like funerals on TV. She doesn't
think that they can ever properly capture the essence of a real funeral.
The writers and I tend to agree. So we leave them to your imagination.

Can you clarify the timeline?

Um, sort of but not as completely as you'd like me to. I can tell you
that the interns are still interns -- which means that less than one
year has passed in Grey's time. I can also tell you that this is TV and
if you over-think the timeline and over-study the show, you will
probably be frustrated because it probably won't seem logical that less
than a year has passed. But as with all art, sometimes you have to just
suspend your disbelief and go for the ride. On Beverly Hills 90210, the
entire cast repeated their junior year of high school. Cause sometimes,
logic-leaps like that are necessary to keep a show on the creative track
you want.

How do you become a writer for a show like Grey's Anatomy? Because I
would love to be one. Love. And I have no idea how to do it.

I have gotten several questions in this vein. So I'm going to attempt to
answer this in brief -- and then I really should go do work.

There are many ways to become a TV writer. You can go to film school.
You can do your undergraduate study in screenwriting. I didn't. I did
take two writing classes -- one was playwriting with Prof. Jon Lipsky my
senior year at Boston University. It was terrific and inspiring and a
big part of what made me want to be a writer. The second was a
screenwriting 101 class at the New School in NYC right after I graduated
college with a prof whose name ai sadly can't remember. . Both were
helpful. But largely, I self-educated. By that I mean, I read a lot of
books on how to write for television. And then I watched a lot of
television. And then I practiced writing for television. I practiced a
LOT. You hear a lot of stories about people moving to LA and never
making it as writers and oh the misery and all the years it takes... My
theory is that -- okay, some of those people aren't talented -- but many
of them, most of them, just moved here too soon. They didn't practice
enough before they started sending scripts out and trying to find an
agent. Many, many people write ONE script, or maybe two, and then think
they're ready to be seen and read . To me, that's insane. Because no
matter now good you think your first script is, the second one will be
better and the third will be better than that. You learn by doing. Write
scripts and show them to trusted friends and get notes and TAKE THE
NOTES and rewrite and then write more scripts. That's how you get good.
Also, read something good every day -- a novel, preferably, something
juicy and inspiring. And write every day. Write every day for a good
long while. And then, when you're ready, buy the books that tell you how
to get your stuff read in Hollywood. There are a lot of good ones.

Okay. I really do have to go now. Thanks for all your wonderful
questions and feedback. We think the world of you, our fans, and
appreciate that the feeling seems to be mutual.

All my Best, Krista

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
