[] "Great Expectations" for Eric Buchman (and his blog)

Original Airdate: 1-25-07

I got a call at midnight last night from my Mom. From the East Coast. So
it was 3am where she was. She watched the show. Went online. And waited.
And waited. And waited. And called.

She wanted to know where my blog was.

She called again this morning. No blog.

Just got an instant message from her 15 minutes ago from her. Asking
about the blog.

My point... I know ya'll are a little frustrated at the lack of a blog.
But no one is more frustrated than my own mom, so you don't need to
worry about punishing me because I'm surely going to be grounded the
next time I get back to Florida.

The thing is, I just don't know where to begin. There's just so much I
want to say.

Do I start by saying how thankful I am for this opportunity? I just
can't thank Shonda enough for this. And many, many thanks to Krista,
Mark, Allan, Tony & Joan for guiding me through the process with such
care. To Stacy for being such a rock on set. To Debora and Kip and
Zoanne and Harry & Gab for their input in the script. To Carolina for
easing all my fears and offering such great advice. Television is a very
collaborative medium, and I'm so fortunate that my first time was with
such a talented and generous and considerate writing staff.

Or do I start with what a hypocrite I am? I'm the guy who posts the
blogs the writers write, so I'm the guy who harps on all them for not
getting in their blogs in a timely manner. And even though I've done two
blogs in the past (this one and this one), this IS my first time writing
about an episode with my name on it. And I finally get where their brain
freeze is coming from. (but don't worry, I'll still harp on them!)

Or do I start with the stuff I know you all want to know about? You see,
for the first two seasons, I was the guy who read every comment. Every.
Single. One of them.

And I know what you really want to know...

And you don't want a recap of what just happened in last night's
episode.

You want to know what happens next.

You want to know how Cristina and Callie respond.

You want to know if Derek finds out about all the proposing and is
inspired to ask Meredith to marry him.

But you know I can't tell you that. Because as you can see in the above,
I love my job. And if I told you, I'd get fired. My parents threatened
to disown me if I didn't tell them. And... I still didn't tell them.
I'll be eating take-out for Thanksgiving this year. But at least I'll
still have my job.

Anyways... I can't really start out with any of those things.

So I'll start with... sex.

Let's talk about George having a lot of it. We needed to show George
grieving in a new way for Grey's. We didn't want to repeat any beats of
Izzie's grief. And because we knew we had to build to that proposal, we
wanted to have George burying his grief in Callie. And in a way that
would bother his best friend Izzie. We also wanted Callie to feel some
remorse. She finally got George, but not in the way she wanted. She's
gotten his body, but the underlying relationship isn't there anymore. So
what does all that add up to? Make George a sex machine and it'll bother
his friends, pain Callie, and be VERY different from Izzie's mourning.

Let's talk about the fact that Cristina and Burke are probably still
having a lot of sex, despite their silent situation. In early versions
of the script, we actually wanted to show just that -- Burke and
Cristina having great sex, but not saying a word. Silent sex. It works
in theory, but in execution (on broadcast television) how the hell do
you show two people having sex, and know they're enjoying it if it's
completely silent. You can't have silence on television. Unless it's for
dramatic effect... waiting for a verdict on Law and Order. Or for
comedic effect. The awkward but brilliant silence of The Office. But
silence during sex? On TV that usually conveys boredom.

Wait a second, I just remembered something. I can't start with sex after
all. My mom is reading this.

So let's start with...

Richard and Adele. Richard finally goes to the board and officially got
his retirement going. Which gets the race for chief going. Which gets
all our attendings acting like children. Which gets the Nazi back. Which
leads him back to Adele's... only to be turned away at the door. Poor,
poor Richard. Does this mean the race is over? All that was for naught?
Wait -- I can't talk about the future. Crap. Okay, moving onto the next
topic...

So let's start with...

The fact that this was my first time.

And how thankful I am that I did it with people who were so gentle and
considerate, and wanted to make sure I was completely satisfied by the
experience.

Wait a second. Sounds like I'm talking about sex again. Um... Okay
then... moving on...

So let's start with...

The Amish. Yeah, we had Amish characters fly on an airplane. But I'm
told that's okay under such dire circumstances. Their daughter is 3000
miles away and she's sick! But wait -- I don't want to upset any Amish
people reading this, so I probably should move on...

(possibly interesting tidbit: first day of shooting, a member of the
crew, Ryan Blank, walked up to me to say that his father was Amish, and
that he just happens to be in town for a few days... an amazing
coincidence. we immediately set up a meeting with his father and our
researcher and director and that's how the Pennsylvania Dutch wound up
in the episode. Mr. Blank made a CD of him saying the lines, and the
actors memorized it and rehearsed it on their own. And I think they did
a great job... even though I still have no clue what they were saying)

Okay. So let's start with...

Meredith and Derek!

Finally. They're a topic with no more taboos. I possibly can't ruin when
they'll get back together, because they got back together 5 episodes
ago. (or 6 depending on how you count "back together"). On the surface,
their story in this episode isn't very complicated. They had a fight
that -- compared to past Meredith and Derek fights -- was barely
anything. I mean, remember when Derek basically called Meredith a whore?
But this was their first fight as a real, honest-to-goodness couple. And
even though it was a minor fight, it's very revealing for Meredith.
She's not used to fighting with someone and having them come back. We
know how things are with her mom. We know her dad left even before she
had a chance to ever fight with him. We can now picture every boyfriend
she ever had leaving after just a couple weeks, if she didn't leave
first. This is probably the longest relationship she's ever been in. And
the first with someone she feels a genuine connection with. We might
know Derek will come back -- but she doesn't. The scene at the end
between them is actually a milestone of sorts for her. She has to admit
just how new to all this she really is. The woman with a habit of
getting drunk and having sex with inappropriate men -- is finally in
virgin territory.

You know, that'll be good title for a novel. "The Virgin Whore" I wonder
if that's been done yet... Just googled it. Crap. It's not a book, but
it's a cocktail made with vodka, tequila, cranberry and apple juice,
food coloring, and lime kool-aid. And you know what? Meredith might
actually like that, considering her fondness for tequila.

Okay, I'm off on a tangent... That's not a good sign. Means I need to
pick a topic with more going on... hmm...

Let's start with...

Alex and Addison. Ouch. That's all I can say. I watched the episode with
a group of friends, and when Alex says "you're my boss, what was I
supposed to do?" (when he explained why he kissed her back in the last
episode) -- it stung the entire room. We all felt what Addison feels in
that moment. But what's most painful about that scene? Not that Alex
effectively shut Addison down in such a cold and direct manner. But that
it seems like such a waste of chemistry. When they went into that
closet, the last thing we wanted to see them do is pour water on their
fire. Okay, I'm getting frustrated just thinking about it. Not a good
topic for me.

So let's start with... Well, what's left?

Mark Sloan?

Can I just say that Eric Dane, who plays Mark, is like the nicest guy
ever? During the read thru for the episode, he paid me my first
compliment ever as a writer (from a professional actor). Sara Ramirez
got to a line I wrote in the Izzie-Callie hallway scene (a line that
never made it to air actually), and she totally sold it. And Eric looked
up and said "way to go, Bucky." And what had been an incredibly
nerve-inducing experience, all of a sudden became very relaxing. My
nerves went away. I was able to enjoy the remainder of the read thru.

Hopefully the excised line will wind up on the DVD. I can't tell you
what the line was, though, because ABC Standards and Practices requested
its removal. In fact, I can't really talk about those network matters at
all, so I guess I should choose another topic...

So...

Let's start with... the opening credits!

Did you notice that Marti Noxon is now in the opening credits!!! Yes,
Buffy fans, THE Marti Noxon. Or as we like to call her. TV's Marti
Noxon. And you know what's even better than having her here as a
consulting producer for the rest of the season? Her writing an episode.
And you know what's even better than her writing an episode? Her writing
and episode WITH Shonda. And you know what's even better than all that?
(wow, I'm beginning to sound like game show host slowly revealing some
big prize) Them writing an episode you can see in less than a month!
Wait a second -- Shonda is telling me that I'm revealing too much. I
can't say anymore, and I've already said too much.

Darn...okay then... I guess there's only one thing left for me to say...

So let's just start with the closing.

Thank you all for watching last night's episode. Thank you for reading
this blog. I hope you enjoyed the episode almost as much as I enjoyed
working on it.

Oh, and thanks, Mom, for being so patient! (even if you've been IMing me
all day while I'm busy taking notes in the writers' room)

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
