[] Drowning on Dry Land...

Original airdate: 2/15/07

So, yeah, that was Denny and Dylan.

I'm trying to be all casual about it.

Like I don't care.

Like, you know, Denny and Dylan, whatever...I'm cool, I'm good.

But I almost hugged Jeffrey Dean Morgan to death when he arrived on set.
He was nice about it considering the restraining order he should have
taken out against me during Season Two. I was glad to see him. And I was
glad to see Kyle Chandler who was gracious enough to fly out here and
film on one of his very few days off from the very well-written Friday
Night Lights.

See, I miss Denny and Dylan. A lot. So it was nice to see them for a
moment, wasn't it? Even if Meredith is dead?

You all have some pretty strong feelings about this. I've been reading
your comments. STRONG feelings. Which I respect. Grey's is in its third
season and we're doing something a little...different. It's about time
we did. Because, just as I said when you all shouted your horror about
the Meredith/George sex, I remind you that we writers like to follow the
characters here and we try very hard not to make story just to make
story. We like to have a point. Meredith being dead is about...well, you
will see what it is about next week. She was in pain, this girl. And...

...okay, I don't want to talk about that. Meredith being dead at the end
of this episode. I can't. Not yet.

What I want to talk about is the other interns. Because they all take
some truly interesting journeys. Izzie and Alex especially. Izzie's is
one my favorites. I didn't come up with the "rock star" line and I
wasn't standing on set when it was shot but that was one of my favorite
Katie Heigl moments this season. She's good, that girl. What I like
about Izzie is that, right now, she's fighting for George. No one else
agrees with her and she's going about it all wrong but still...she truly
believes her best friend is in trouble and she's fighting to make him
see it. It may be none of her business but when do we stay out of the
business of those that we love? But I gotta admit, I adore Callie and in
that moment, when Izzie tells George he made a mistake marrying Callie,
I hate Izzie. Just hate her. But she's a good person and she never holds
her tongue and for that, I respect her. But will George?

It's interesting to see Alex dealing with this Jane Doe and her
horrible, painful to watch face. He's got some growing to do, this guy
and hopefully, we'll see him begin to do that. Plus, I love the moment
when he tells Addison that he'd notice if she went missing. I don't know
that they are in any way right for one another but it was a kind thing
to say to a woman he has heat with. Cause, I don't know if you noticed?
But Addison's lonely these days and a little bit adrift.

The most interesting one to watch this episode is Derek. I don't know if
you remember that in first season, he said to Meredith: "You were like
coming up for fresh air. I was drowning and you saved me." It was good
to be able to call that back (everything comes back around eventually on
this show, I find) and to see what happens when Meredith is drowning.
He's not Mer's knight in shining whatever -- he gets kicked out the
trauma room where Richard and Bailey are working on her. He's forced to
sit out in the hall, helpless. And he's seeing his worst nightmare come
true. Because he's realizing: Meredith has become so important to him
and the prospect of losing her is terrifying. Who is he if he isn't the
guy who rescues Mer? Who is he when he can't save a life?

Shoots With No Script was anxious about tonight. Not in an obvious way.
In a Shoots With No Script kind of way. All under the surface and
mellow. But I know he was. 'Cause I was anxious too. We make these
episodes and then we sit still, freaked out, and wait to see how it
feels when it goes on the air. It's a little like having to speak in
public and we never get used to it. Because you all have a reaction. And
we care about that.

Also, because Shoots With No Script and I are both a teensy bit
neurotic. But you knew that...

-Shonda

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
