[] Marti Noxon on "Some Kind of Miracle"

Original airdate: 2-22-07

A few months ago, I got a call from Shonda and Betsy Beers. I was lying
on the floor when they called. I had my computer in front of me, so I
was "writing". I'd recently had lunch with Shonda and Betsy, and a few
other meals with Shonda before that. So we'd hung out . We'd dined. We'd
complained about... things only lucky TV people complain about. Things
related to actually having jobs. Things which, by real world standards,
barely even qualify as problems. But that's why we need each other.
Because we get each other, man

When the call came, despite previous eating and complaining, I was
intimidated. Shonda and Betsy had created this monster hit, this
highly-entertaining medical drama that millions of people watched and
adored. Including me. I mean, Shonda's kind of eerily talented -- and
she knows Oprah.

But, honestly, I needed a good call. I was working on a soon-to-be
Ill-fated pilot. Before that it was a brief and ill-fated stay on an
otherwise successful ABC show. And before that I launched a brief and
ill-fated series for Fox. And before that I worked on a... brief and
ill-fated series for Fox.

We see a pattern.

Buffy was good. Can we talk about Buffy?

Problem is -- Buffy was a long time ago. She lives on --- Season 8 soon
to be in comic book form... But, in my nightmares, I'm 90 at a Buffy
convention, and nobody wants my autograph. They're all in line to see
virtual Joss, who has invented a way to put his brain in a jar on a
floaty thing, live forever and be funnier and more prolific than
everybody for THE REST OF ALL TIME. I love Joss, but it's hard being his
friend.

Like I was saying. I needed a good call. And it came. Would I like to
"come hang out" on Grey's for a while? I'll skip the part where I hung
up and cried and called my agent and he cried and we all cried because,
try as I might, it would be hard for me, personally, to turn Grey's into
an "ill-fated" show. Especially since I was to have a vague job title,
no authority and non-specific duties.

So I hung out. For a few days it was all Christmas baskets and trying to
make Shonda laugh (she was dying from iron deficiency and was too weak
to lift the corners of her mouth -- nobody knew that yet, so I danced
like a little monkey. But more on that later). I also got to hang with
the aforementioned Shonda and Betsy (so great at her job and so funny
she makes me laugh until things come out of my nose); the amazing Krista
Vernoff (amazing and pregnant and beautiful and able to write many
fabulous pages in a single bound); Allan Heinberg -- Joss-like in his
smartness and multi-talentedness; the warm, funny and ridiculously
"on-it" in-every-way Tony and Joan Phelan; The Hammer -- Mark Wilding --
a great writer and The Godfather around here; fantastic (also lovely and
pregnant) Debora, whose writing made me laugh and cry and all that other
envy-inducing stuff; Stacy who can produce both wonderful scripts and
amazing portraits of people made entirely of pipe cleaners... Not to
mention the always enchanting Kip and Caro ... Zoanne and Elizabeth,
great writers and the people who actually know what doctors do and say.
Every one of them was welcoming and seriously funny and dedicated. Also
-- Kern, Eric, Darren, Jim, Chris, Sonay -- assistants today -- our
bosses tomorrow. Tremendously funny and talented in their own right.

Finally -- a special mention of Meg, the Writer's PA, who we all adore
-- in the way that only creatures in captivity can love the person who
brings them food. I've worked quite a few places, and I can honestly say
that the single greatest benefit of working on a hit show is that Meg
appears, at lunch time, with hot food and everything is as ordered. This
may seem like a small thing, but for some reason in has proved
impossible everywhere but here. And when lunch doesn't come, writers get
cranky and they stop working. They start talking about Nascar and our
ex-whatevers, shopping, musicals and what we ate yesterday. (Okay, not
Nascar -- but I'm doing what I can to butch up the writer image here.)
So thank God for Meg, who is great at many other things -- but basically
keeps Grey's Anatomy up and running.

But I digress. I figured I had some time. I was just around to do...
what exactly? Nobody knew. This is the truth about the "consulting"
title. Nobody knows what it is. I think it has something to do with
lunch.

But Shonda and company had other ideas. Shonda's first part of a
two-part episode became a two-parter itself -- Ferry Hell, one and two.
The ones in which Meredith goes into the water and dies. So Shonda
suddenly had all this work to do and it turned out she had no IRON in
her blood. And very little blood in her blood. Shonda needed help. From
a doctor most of all -- but a little help from me on the side. Which is
how I came to co-write this episode of Grey's.

And the fact that there are dead people in it is just a coincidence. For
those of you who fear I'm whispering in Shonda's ear about the dark side
and alternate realities and stuff -- this was her thing, okay? I'm here
to write MEDICINE, people. And sex. And sexy medicine.

I was again -- intimidated. It was a challenge to write and shoot for so
many reasons. Not in a digital-ferry-crashing-into-a-digital-dock way,
but still... This, again, wasn't a typical Grey's. Half of it takes
place... where? In Meredith's head? In Heaven? We decided, for obvious
reasons, not to get too specific. And we knew Meredith had to go on a
journey. But, get it wrong and it's "Touched by an Icy Blue Surgeon."
And Denny and Dylan? I'm supposed to touch the sacredness of Denny and
Dylan? I think not. All will agree that I basically punted that stuff.

But you know, Denny and Izzie at the end. Shonda's been talking about
that since she pitched me the episode. It was heart-breaking then, in my
office with bad lighting... So on it's feet -- awesome. But I'll let
Shonda weigh in more on that favorite moment.

Back in Seattle Grace we struggled with going to such a dark place and
finding the funny. Not that we found a lot of funny. If there's a theme
here -- besides the search for Miracles -- it's "death sucks."

For me, what emerged were the love stories. Not just between Derek and
Meredith, but between Cristina and Meredith. That essential friendship.
Cristina walking out was something that was hotly debated here.
Apparently -- that's not good doctoring (I'm new!) But it felt right. If
not now, when? Meredith is Cristina's person. And Richard and Ellis...
That love coming to a definitive end. There's a lot of grief in all of
this, but there's great hope too. It's the lesson from "the other place"
too. We are who we love.

In any case - Shonda did all the heavy lifting. She found the moments
that sing for me, that pull it all together. I was still running around
asking dumb things like "what's an Attending?" Then Adam Arkin, a
wonderful actor in his own right, did an amazing job directing it. And,
as you'll see -- all the actors are in stunningly good form. But aren't
they always?

Oh yeah -- they are really that pretty. That's fun.

So. Thanks for letting me blog. It really was a good call to get --
"come hang at Grey's." The people here are tremendous, and the show's
pretty damn fun to write when it isn't trying to kill us all. I hope to
stick around, at least until somebody tells me what an Attending is.

***and the agent weeps***

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
