[] Debora Cahn on "Scars and Souvenirs"...

Original airdate: 3-15-07

Izzie and George sleep together.

Izzie and George sleep together.

And what does sleep mean, really, it could mean anything, which is what
you figure's going through Izzie's head when she pulls up the sheet to
check if she's wearing anything, and the answer is, "No. Nothing at all.
You're naked in a bed with your best friend, and it sure as hell looks
like he's naked too. Everybody's naked and in the bed and have been for
a while and they have bed head and are naked." So sleep could just mean
sleep, but probably doesn't.

The moments you wait for, in a job like this, are ones like when Shonda
calls you into the writer's room and says, "You know how we talked about
how maybe George and Izzie sleep together? Put that in your episode."
That's when you smile, and try to be cool, and say, "Oh, sure, I can
find room for that." And then you leave the writer's room and do the
biggest happy dance you've ever done, and it goes on for a while, until
you realize somebody from the script department is standing nearby and
watching and now thinks you're epileptic.

Izzie and George sleep together.

Well it was bound to happen, right? Best friends. They get each other
like nobody else gets them. They share everything. It's easy. It's
natural. It's like gravity, how can you fight it? How can you not fall?
Okay, there's a way to not fall. Lots of people don't sleep with their
best friend. In fact, I'd like to take this opportunity to assure my
husband that I've never slept with any of my best friends, and I don't
plan to start any time soon. But it makes sense, in a way, right? Isn't
that the fantasy? That the guy and the best friend can be the same
person? That Izzie and George, who have shared every minute of the most
intense time in their lives, turned to each other in every success and
every failure and every breakup and every triumph, with every piece of
gossip and every bit of pain, should share...everything? Share their
hearts and their souls and... all their other parts? It makes sense,
right? Right up to the "he's married" part. That's where it all kind of
falls apart.

Oh Callie. Callie gets a pretty raw deal around here. She's tough. Which
is good. She needs to be. But she gets a pretty raw deal. More on that
later.

Back to sleeping with your best friend... We've spent some time here
today wondering if this is going to encourage a whole bunch of people
deciding to sleep with their best friends. And who knows what would come
of that. All I'll say is, if your best friend's married, I don't
recommend it. But if your best friend's single, and so are you, and you
always kind of thought of them as the guy you go to for advice about
guys, maybe you should tilt your head to the side and see if they look a
little different. Roll the dice. Who knows? Maybe the best relationship
you'll ever have...you're already having. Let us know how that works
out.

But George is married. So there's not really a way this can work out
well.

Oh Callie.

Now, to be fair, Callie is not some innocent, trod-upon martyr. She
lied. About something kind of big. And then flew off the handle when she
found out George told his friends. And she flies off the handle at
George a lot. The whole, "Why am I always the dog getting whopped on the
nose with the newspaper" thing? I think he's really got a point there.
Callie was into the relationship first, and pissed that George wasn't
there faster. Callie was in love first, and pissed that George wasn't
there faster. There's a lot of Callie being pissed for George having
feelings different than hers, and he's allowed to have his own feelings.
She doesn't have to enjoy it, but she can't really blame him for it, and
she does. A lot. He's apologizing, a lot. And that's just got to be
exhausting.

Still shouldn't turn around and sleep with his best friend, though.
That's not cool either.

Izzie and George.

I'm not going to get into the Meredith, and the Derek, and the dinner,
and the father, and Cristina and Burke and Colin, who we love, not just
for his dashing British accent, but it certainly doesn't hurt, and Alex,
and the tragically deformed Jane Doe, because I rambled endlessly about
all that on the podcast I did with Betsy yesterday and I don't want to
repeat myself. (My first podcast. Very intimidating. Kind of horrifying,
really, though Betsy is just masterful, and I think in a few years will
have her own talk show.) And because I've now taken up about all the
real estate they want to give me on the Izzie and George. But I'm okay
with that, in the end. I think I am. Because... you know... Izzie slept
with George.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
