[] Stacy McKee gives you some "Time after Time"

Original airdate: 4-19-07

Ok. Before I get into the whole George slippity slipping on Izzie's
scrub pants and Derek needing to choose: Be the Chief or Be With
Meredith and DAMN -- did you notice that Richard can TOTALLY bust a move
??--- I just want to say...

Welcome back, you guys! It's been a little while since the last new
Grey's Episode... And it's been even longer since I've had a chance to
talk to you! That was Waaaaay back in November, back before George was
married (let alone falling for Izzie!), back before Meredith was
(almost) dead (and talking to dead people), HECK -- back before the boys
went camping! THINK of how much has HAPPENED!!!

I know -- lately we've had a few repeats, and you've all been very
patient, but now... here we are. This week marks the first of the final
few Season Three episodes and -- MAN. I can say this because I know
what's going to happen next... I seriously envy you guys. You are about
to have SO MUCH FUN. All new episodes. Funny episodes. Heartbreaking
episodes. Supersized episodes. Cliffhanger episodes.

This is it. The beginning of the end of the season. So, brace
yourselves.

Now, about THIS episode...

I want to talk about mothers. (I know -- it sounds boring, but just
stick with me for a second here.) Love 'em, hate 'em, miss 'em, or try
very hard (only to be unsuccessful) to fool 'em -- we've all got some
kind of mother somewhere. Even if we've never met her. Even if she's not
related by blood. Even if she's haunting us from the grave. Even if,
when we went to college, she secretly recorded things onto our computers
like: "Words of Wisdom from Mom: Never have unprotected sex on days that
end in the letter Y" -- We all have a mother. Whether we like it or not.

(And yes, my mom DID record that onto my computer when I was a college
freshman. And, no -- I never could figure out how to erase it, so...
every time I misspelled a word for the next four years, I was reminded
to use a condom. True story.)

There are a whole lotta mothers floating around tonight's episode.

Ava meets her faux mother. This poor girl has no memory, a new face, her
only real friend right now is Alex and she's about to become a mother
herself -- and suddenly the cruelest thing imaginable happens to her.
She is first claimed by, then rejected by her "faux" mother. When Ava's
"mom" walks through that door, Ava believes that her life, the very
history she can't remember, is about to be restored -- only to have that
hope yanked away from her -- it's horrible. It's devastating. And Alex
is the one who has to deliver the news. Alex, the guy who has been
there, looking out for Ava, from the very first moment he pulled her out
of that water -- he's the one who has to tell her that "those people"
are not HER people. No wonder she lashes out at him. Stupid faux mommy.

And then there's Meredith -- trying to figure out how to react to HER
Fake Mommy. I swear, if anyone could use a little motherly nurturing,
it's Meredith Grey.

I was secretly thrilled when I realized I was going to have Susan in my
episode. I love Susan. Sure, she's a little pushy (what with the whole
bringing groceries over uninvited thing -- and chatting up Derek before
Meredith has even stumbled her way downstairs...) but Susan is, mostly,
just a very caring, very genuine MOM. The exact opposite of Ellis. It's
the kind of mother Meredith has never actually experienced first hand,
and it's the kind of mother Meredith (clearly) desperately needs -- even
if she isn't sure how to accept Susan's kindness quite yet... There was
a line that had to be cut for time that I loved: "I'm not used to moms
of any kind before my coffee."

But don't be fooled -- Susan's not squeaky clean and perfect. Her
"gestures" aren't coming out of a solely kind and generous place... they
are also brought on by some good old fashioned guilt. Susan feels
responsible for the fact that Thatcher was so absent from Meredith's
life. Susan's known about Meredith for years, for her entire marriage --
and yet, it was a very recent chance meeting at the hospital that
finally prompted Susan (and Thatch) to become a part of Meredith's
life...

No wonder Meredith is a little cautious. In Meredith's experience,
mothers ALWAYS have an agenda, and it's usually not a generous or
thoughtful one...Which is why Susan is so important. She has the
potential to help heal a few of those wounds for Meredith. Susan is like
a happy little beacon of motherly hope for Meredith and her future...
even if she DOES stop by unannounced.

But, of course, the Grey's universe has to even itself out. We can't
have the potential of a happy, hopeful motherly Susan relationship on
the horizon for Meredith without a little dark and twisty Dead Mommy
love haunting Meredith, too -- even from the grave.

And by haunting, I mean messing with Meredith's McDreamy.

Richard says to Derek that he made a promise to Ellis. Richard told
Ellis, on her deathbed, that he would look out for Meredith. So, as
unfair as it seems, Richard intends to make good on that promise. Which
means he's willing to pass up Derek as the next Chief in order to make
sure Derek will be available to focus on Meredith.

What's so interesting about this is that -- it's not that Richard is
punishing Derek for having a relationship with an intern. Or, in fact,
trying to force Derek to choose between his relationship with Meredith
or a shot at being Chief... Actually, it's a vote of confidence from
Richard. Richard clearly thinks Derek is good for Meredith. Richard
wants their relationship to succeed. And he knows -- firsthand -- that
nurturing a relationship properly is nearly impossible given the
professional demands of being Chief. He thinks he's doing Derek (and
therefore Meredith) a favor. Richard is protecting Meredith. He thinks
he's doing exactly what Meredith's Dead Mommy would want him to do...

The question is -- how will Derek respond to all of this? We see him
there, at the end -- lost in thought. What's he thinking about? Is he
questioning whether or not Meredith's worth all this trouble -- Is he
thinking about what Bailey just said to him -- that if you can't be with
the person you love, then all the rest of "this" means nothing... ? Yes
and Yes. Derek's not being a jerk by not answering the phone. He's being
human. He's trying his best to work through his demons -- in private --
so he doesn't take them out (unfairly) on anyone (like Meredith) in
public -- he doesn't WANT to hurt Meredith; he loves her. And, he's just
been told that she's the one thing that will prevent him from achieving
his life-long professional dream. Cut the guy some slack. He's allowed a
broody night all alone in his trailer, don't you think?

Then of course, there's Bailey. She always knows when one of her "kids"
needs her. She just can't help herself... And right now, that kid is
Izzie.

The Izzie bone marrow story has been swirling around our writers room
for a while. In fact, I'm pretty sure that as soon as we figured out
Izzie had a daughter -- we also figured out that one day, that daughter
would get sick. She would need bone marrow. And that would bring her to
Izzie.

The question has always been -- WHEN do we bring Izzie's daughter back?
There have been a LOT of possibilities, but suddenly -- in the wake of
this new Izzie/George relationship... At this very crucial moment, when
Izzie is mourning the loss of her closest friend, and when Goerge is
having trouble even looking Izzie in the eye... SOMETHING needed to
happen that would bring them together---privately. Intimately.
Perfectly.

Hello, Izzie Jr!

The thing I've always loved about this story is that it's not about
Izzie or George. Their tension, their fling, their awkwardness -- it all
gets put on a back burner the moment something much more important falls
into their lives. They have to set aside their weirdness, step outside
of themselves and their screwed up lives, and -- just hold each others
hands.

It's like that moment, just before the hematologist starts to drill into
Izzie's hip, when Izzie and George's faces are just inches apart, and
nothing else matters. It's just George being there for Izzie when she
needs him most -- it's clean, it's simple, and it's one of the most
meaningful moments -- for both of them. Well... that and the scene with
the scrub pants...

SIDEBAR: Can we please talk about George and Izzie's scrub pants??? Is
it just me, or was that moment charged in a way that made me both a
liiiiittle bit uncomfortable AND incapable of breathing for -- well --
the rest of the scene? I'm telling you -- this whole George/ Izzie
thing? I'm as conflicted as you are. I see a scene like that and I think
to myself -- Oh my goodness, they belong together. Right NOW. Make it
happen!! Until I see Callie a few scenes later and... well, I get mad at
myself for forgetting all about her. Because I love Callie, and I hate
the idea that George might hurt her -- REALLY hurt her... Callie's
blameless here. She loves a man who really really seems to be... falling
for his best friend?!?!?

Alright. Enough already. I've been talking way way too long -- plus, I
still have to call MY mom and find out what she thought of the
episode... I tried calling her last night (I'm in LA and she's two hours
later in Houston) -- and I very carefully timed it so she'd be done with
all her work (she kicks butt as a realtor there) so we could chat... and
when I called, she answered with: "Now, Stacy. You KNOW I can't talk to
you right now. The Chief just told some woman that he's 'a FRIENDLY
guy.' I have to go!!"

And then she hung up on me.

(sigh.) Moms!

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
