[] Mark Wilding on "Desire"

Original airdate: 4-26-07

Desire. It can wreck your life. It can be, as Izzie rightly says, your
Penis Fish. It can crawl up inside you and... yeah, you pretty much know
the rest... So that's what I'm gonna talk about in this blog. Desire and
the metaphor we came up with to represent it. The Candiru. Or Penis
Fish. I won't call it a Candiru. I'll call it a Penis Fish because
that's a lot funnier to say than Candiru. I'm not sure if Penis Fish
should be capitalized, but if you had one in you, you'd probably think
it'd be worth capitalizing. In fact, ALL the letters in it probably
deserve to be capitalized. PENIS FISH. However, I don't want to be
accused of sensationalism so we'll just keep it at Penis Fish.

First some background. My personal desire has been to do this story for
a long time. In fact, it's been the whole writing staff's desire. We
actually had the story in a couple of previous scripts but it never
quite worked out. It either didn't work with the theme of the episode or
we'd just done a show with someone having penis troubles and we didn't
want to do penis overload, as it were.

Second, the Penis Fish is a real thing. It's more of a parasite than a
fish. It likes to swim up the little eddies created by a fish's gills.
Then it stops and latches on to the insides of the unsuspecting fish.
The unsuspecting, unlucky fish. And then it, well... feeds. Yeah. Very
yucchy. It's found in South America. However, unlike, say, telenovellas,
it's not coming to America anytime soon. You will not find it at your
local swimming hole or the YMCA. It's strictly Amazon. But it does
exist. Look hard enough on the Internet and you'll find a picture or two
of the thing. It's thin enough to get in your urine stream, slippery
enough to avoid capture and agile enough to work its way inside you.
Where it gorges on your blood or tissue. And gets bigger. So when the
Chief pulled it out at the end, that's about what it really looks like.
Hey, we do our research. The Discovery Channel even has some web site
where they do a re-enactment of the thing swimming into some poor guy.
Even that fake re-enactment gives you the willies. At least I hope it's
fake.

So George and Izzie make the mistake of thinking they can somehow quench
their desire. That by ignoring it and saying it's not there, they can
simply move on. Be best buddies again. It's not that nothing happened.
Something did. But they think they're strong enough and wise enough to
deal with it. It was a one time thing. A simple mistake that can be
rectified by their own determination to put it behind them. The trouble
is... their desire keeps getting in the way. And that's why George has
hit upon a new way to deal with it. Go West, young man. In this
case...Mercy West.

It's not just George and Izzie that suffer from this affliction. All our
couples in this episode suffer with some form of metaphorical Penis Fish
-- a desire that's hooked into you and won't let go. Look at Derek and
Meredith. They got what they desired. Each other. But once you get what
you want, is it really what you want? Because, unfortunately, love isn't
just about desire. At some point it's about other stuff, too. Getting
through the day to day. Putting up with your partner's snoring.
Wondering if they have, well, some kind of death wish...

Those things tend to complicate relationships. Eat away at them. Make
you wonder if you're getting out of it what you put in. How many
problems can you take before the taking gets too hard? Derek tells
Meredith he doesn't know if he can keep breathing for her. It's not just
costing him the chiefship, it's also...wearing him out. She's his Penis
Fish. Does he want to get rid of his Penis Fish? That's impossible,
right? It's Meredith and Derek. It's just a bump in the road. Or is it?
Well, all I can say for now is stay tuned...

Addison and Alex have been desiring each other for what seems like
forever. And we finally pay it off with a tryst in the on-call room. How
about that? THEY FINALLY DID IT (now that deserves all capital letters).
We've never done a tally of the various places where our people have
done it in the hospital. I have to think the on-call room leads the way,
with storage closet a close second. But Alex clearly has major issues
with girls who like him. So he detaches himself pretty quickly from any
possible entanglement. He won't let Addison be his Penis Fish. . And
finally Burke and Cristina. Burke wants his relationship with Cristina
to work. He wants her to choose that wedding cake. We know what that
cake means to him when he sits down with Izzie in the conference room at
the end of the episode. This cake. For this day. With this woman. And in
the end, Cristina does choose a cake. The red one. The red velvet. And
Burke has hope again. He's wanted this wedding all along. And he's
thinking, hell, maybe now she's finally on board. Maybe she finally
wants this thing just as much as he does. Maybe, just maybe, they're
finally heading in the right direction. The question, of course, is does
Cristina feel that way? She loves the guy enough to have made little
compromises along the way (see Stacy's great episode last week). But is
this whole wedding thing her Penis Fish?

Okay, even though I said this blog would just be about desire and the
Penis Fish, I lied. Only because I really liked the scene at the end
with Bailey and the Chief. Where he's leaving for the night and he runs
into her filling in surgeries on the OR board for the next day. And he's
told her earlier in the day that she has to delegate and she just can't.
SHE CAN'T. It's not in her. And, truthfully, it's not in him either. The
question is, will Bailey suffer for that?

The answers to that question and a lot more will be coming up in the
next three weeks. I promise, it's going to be a GREAT ride. Next week's
our two hour episode and it's moving and funny and all things Grey's
Anatomy. And that's not even the finale. In the meantime, if you find
yourself in the middle of the Amazon and you have to take a pee, stifle
whatever desire you have to go in the river... and just find a nice
thicket of trees or a large bush. And that way, you can avoid being what
no one desires -- being another odd medical story on the Discovery
Channel.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
