[] Mark Wilding on "Let The Truth Sting"...

The truth. We like to think there's only one version of it. Namely, our
own. But then someone else comes along and they insist on giving you
their (generally wrongheaded) version of the truth. The truth
is...there's all sorts of truths. The varnished truth. The unvarnished
truth. The naked truth. Half-truths. Whole truths. And what we finally
addressed in this episode. THE PAINFUL TRUTH. The kind of truth we don't
always want to hear.

We all have these ideas of ourselves -- of how we are -- so when
somebody else actually weighs in about us, well, it can be a shock. I'm
going to quote the Scottish poet Robert Burns right now because I've
always wanted to quote him and I couldn't really figure how to cram this
quote into a birthday toast or a Thanksgiving speech or a piece of
wisdom I might pass on to my kids -- who wouldn't want to hear it anyway
(that's my painful truth). Also it might lend this blog a little more
class. "If only God, the gift he gee us/To see ourselves as others see
us." Yes, even famous Scottish poets wrote about the painful truth.

Anyway, just about everyone at Seattle Grace has to face the painful
truth about themselves in this episode. Bailey when she has to stand in
front of Callie and admit that she's been having trouble with the
pecking order of things. Callie, who is, my God, hiding from the truth
because she can't bear to hear what she just KNOWS is coming. Okay, she
doesn't know one hundred percent KNOW, KNOW but she suspects and that's
enough to drive her underground -- into the Residents Lounge. Anything
to avoid her cheating husband...

How about Lexie and Meredith? Meredith's served a painful, unwelcome
dollop of the truth when Bailey tells her that she hasn't said a kind
word to her sister since she arrived at Seattle Grace. And after that
fact settles on Meredith, she decides she has to give Lexie the painful
truth about her mother. Meredith has been so cold to Lexie -- in Lexie's
mind at least -- that it's even got her to wondering about the level of
care that Susan may have received on the last day of her life. And that
scene where Meredith sits down with Lexie and starts to lay out the
facts of her mom's death -- where we see Lexie finally getting the
painful truth -- well, let's just say it's one of my favorite scenes in
the show.

A couple of my other favorite scenes involve Izzie and Charlie. Shonda
said she wanted Grey's to go in a happier, lighter direction this year.
And I think this story was the kind of thing she had in mind. A patient
who wants to die, is in fact DETERMINED to die and...it's funny and
kinda heartbreaking. And here's a behind the scenes tidbit. We hired the
actor Jack Axelrod to be Old Guy last year. The idea was that his room
would be the place where our interns could occasionally go to study or
eat. We put Jack in a semi-coma so our gang would essentially have their
own private lunch room/study hall.

During the course of last season, we used Jack to lie in the bed and,
well...just lie in the bed. And he closed his eyes and he would shift in
bed, make an occasional mouth sound and he was very good at it. When we
decided to wake him up from his year long sleep, we knew Jack was a
professional actor, we just weren't sure how good a professional actor
he'd be. At least I wasn't. But, my God, he was a TERRIFIC actor. I
LOVED him sparring with Izzie. He was funny and ornery and
straightforward and yet compassionate as Charlie. Especially when it
came to telling Izzie the painful truth. That married men will string
you along. That they're not always in the habit of telling you the
truth. And as much as Izzie didn't want to hear what Charlie had to say,
she came to appreciate him, even seek him out. He became her friend. And
frankly, Jack was so good in the part that for a brief, fleeting moment,
we even thought maybe we should keep him around. But in the interest of
good storytelling, we just couldn't. Which really kinda hurt...

Then there's the subject of their sparring. George. Who starts out
determined to tell Callie the painful truth about himself and Izzie but
his interaction with Connie and her friends -- sometimes the truth can
be TOO painful -- makes him reconsider, then finally dive in and tell
Callie that he slept with Izzie. Wait until you see him deal with the
consequences of that next week. Allan Heinberg wrote a very funny, very
moving episode. So even if you missed this episode, tune in to that one!
It's great!

Mark and Derek also trade truths with each other. Mark has to remind
Derek about the truth of his relationship with Meredith. That maybe he's
fooling himself and she won't ever be all whole. And Derek returns the
truth-telling favor when he scolds Mark and the Chief for being
foolhardy in trying a way too experimental surgery on Connie. Although,
he softens the blow in that same scene when he reminds the Chief to tell
Adele the truth about why he wants to move back in. That he misses her,
that she's all he can think about, etc. Which is, truth be told, vintage
McDreamy.

Finally, we get to see Bailey give our big truth-teller, Alex, the
truth. That there's a reason we don't listen to interns -- it's
dangerous. And then if finally falls to Alex to unload on the world's
oldest intern, Norman. Ed Hermann is great in the part (wait until you
see him next week, he's hysterical). Ed plays Norman as nice and
avuncular and such a sweet soul. However, despite his advanced age, the
truth is Norman has a lot to learn. After all, he's still an intern.

And, as we've discovered over the last three seasons, what can be more
painful than that?

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
