[] Krista Vernoff on "Haunt You Every Day"...

First things first. Blogging about episode number 5 when you are
currently spending long days in the writers' room working on episode 12?
This kind of thing was MUCH easier before I had a baby. Yes, since we
last spoke my beautiful daughter Cosette was born -- and with her
arrival went the vast majority of my brain cells. Seriously, it's
craaaazy how dumb I am. Can't. Remember. Crap. I currently have my
lovely and talented assistant, Star, running around the building looking
for a dvd of "Haunt You Everyday" so I can remember what the hell it's
about. I vaguely remember something about Halloween. So that's what I'll
talk about.

Halloween has long been a favorite holiday of my family. We are a highly
delusional people, and any opportunity to pretend to be someone else, we
seize upon with glee. Every year, my Dad, until he died at 56, would
spend like, 4 hours in the bathroom putting on this unbelievable
costume. He would dress as one of the monsters from the Time Machine.
What were they called?? Warlock? ...Morlock! I think it was morlock!
God, I wish I was kidding about my memory. Anyway, he was big on the
holiday. I, myself, remember being chastised by a neighbor lady when, at
age 13, I was dressed up like a kitty/bunny/rodent type creature,
ringing doorbells and trick or treating. She told me I was too old for
this sort of thing and I STILL remember my devastation, cause truth be
told, that hadn't even occurred to me. I loooove Halloween (and you
can't believe how excited I am to dress my 7 month old in a monkey
costume and carry her around the neighborhood -- no one can tell me I'm
too old for that!!) I'm ranting, as usual, but my point is...Meredith.
That moment where she tells Mark that Ellis never got Halloween together
and didn't approve of knocking on doors, begging for food... That moment
explains so so so much to me about our lovely, broken Meredith. That her
first experience trick or treating is taking an earless boy around the
hospital to make his pro-bono surgery happen... I find it utterly
heartbreaking. And I love that Mark points out to her that she fell
pretty far from the Ellis tree. I think it was critically important to
Meredith to hear those words, because the haunting Meredith is feeling,
is the fear that she will die alone like her Mom did. Because Derek said
he might find someone else before she's ready. And she doesn't know how
to get ready. Cause she's an emotional cripple who's unwilling or unable
to lay her ass down on a therapist's couch for the many years it takes
to work through issues like she has. Meredith's version of therapy --
her very best idea -- is to bring her mom's ashes to work. Y'know, in a
strange way it makes sense -- like, she understands that she's been
sticking her mom in the back of her closet, literally and metaphorically
-- and that if she doesn't start to look at this stuff (i.e.: herself)
she's in danger of dying alone (i.e.; losing Derek forever.) Life is
hard isn't it? But I love and applaud Meredith's ongoing willingness to
try -- as she explains to Derek when his hands are covered in mommy dust
and he's looking at her like maybe, just maybe he should escort her up
to the psych ward, "This is me trying." See, Derek comes from sanity,
and a Mom who probably made him homemade Halloween costumes every year
and chaperoned the school dances and things -- so it's hard for him to
get, exactly how haunted Meredith is. Richard, though, gets it. Because
Ellis haunts him, too. And my favorite scene, maybe ever, is the one in
which Richard and Meredith put Ellis to rest in a surgical sink. I hope,
I hope, I hope you all got this. I hope so much that no one found this
disrespectful. (My Dad, for the record, has been laid to rest in
something like 28 different countries. He had always wanted to travel,
and never got to much, so after he died, my stepmom put his ashes in
many little baggies and gave them out to all his friends with the
directive that when they went somewhere cool, they should bring him. I
kid you not. I myself scattered him in the Bahamas, in Paris and in
Scotland.) Point is, there is nowhere Ellis would rather be put to rest
than in the scrubroom at Seattle Grace. This is absolutely the most
respectful and appropriate thing Meredith could have done. And Ellis was
a very private woman, so the intimate ceremony, her daughter and the man
who loved her most, was all she would have wanted. There are more things
in this episode, I know there are, but I loaned my dvd to the new writer
and my assistant isn't back yet and my brain isn't functioning and I'm
needed in the writers' room, so I will say goodbye here and wish you all
a very happy Halloween. May no one ever tell you you are too old to
knock on doors and beg for food.

Xoxo, Krista

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
