[] Stacy McKee on "Kung Fu Fighting"...

Original Airdate: 11-1-07

So -- I have this group of friends. It started as just four of us -- two
of whom I've known since I was six years old... They all live in Texas
(where I grew up) and I live in California -- so we don't all get to see
each other as often as we'd like... A few years ago, we decided to start
taking little trips together -- just us girls. Nothing too fancy -- just
happy, silly girlfriend getaways -- to Vegas or New Orleans or Hawaii...
And (as a joke, really) we started calling ourselves "The Bad Girls."
Mostly because we'd find ourselves in Vegas on a Friday night, totally
wiped after airplane flights and crazy work weeks -- and we'd be ready
for bed, perfectly sober, by 11pm. SO happy just to sleep.

Very sad. So NOT "bad" at all. In any way. And yet... the name stuck.

Pretty soon, all our other friends, our spouses, our parents -- they all
started calling us "The Bad Girls" too. Us. The most ridiculously tame
"bad girls" on the planet -- I'm not kidding. Our version of hardcore is
getting henna tattoos -- because they're not permanent. True story.

The strange thing is, it's like we've inadvertently formed some
exclusive club --- our husbands get jealous of our trips and try to
invite themselves along. Some of us have been approached by other
friends -- they want to be Bad Girls too; isn't there some way they can
join in all the fun? They'll do what it takes. They'll get hazed. They
can be bad; they can be hardcore... It's a little like our own private
Fight Club or something -- only, with pedicures and martinis instead of
all the blood and -- well -- punching.

We're so not hardcore, and yet... we also kind of are. Hardcore comes in
many shapes and many sizes. (And, yes, I know that sounds porny. You
people and your dirty dirty minds.)

Let's talk about Meredith. She ended the last episode by finally putting
her mother to rest -- by washing Ellis' ashes down a scrub sink. And now
-- she's reeling a little bit. Starting to reevaluate why she is where
she is, why she's being haunted by her past, why -- after experiencing
death and coming back from it -- she's still too scared to really move
forward and go after what she really wants -- what she really needs...

Meredith wants nothing more than to be strong and brave and... hardcore.
And, in this episode, she comes so close. She's lying there in Derek's
arms, and she starts to open up -- to let him in. And, you can see it in
Derek's eyes. You can almost hear what he's thinking in that moment --
that this is it. He put himself out there two episodes ago, he told her
that he wants a future -- a real future -- and he wants it with her...
And finally, Meredith is about to answer him. With something other than
sex in an on-call room. She's about to let him in and admit to him that
life is short, so fricking short. She wants that same future with him
too. And yet...

She doesn't. She stops short of actually letting Derek in and -- as
usual -- shuts down. Just shy of REALLY putting herself out there.
Almost hardcore, but... not quite. He knows it. And she knows it. Which
is why she's so messed up in the end.

Ah... the end. When Meredith opens the door to find Alex and Lexie
getting sexy in the hallway. Love it. In fact, I pretty much always love
Alex Karev -- like when he's heckling George or stifling laughter as
they all watch the skydiver video. Alex is kind of the epitome of
hardcore -- he's a bad ass without even trying. He was with Ava last
episode, he's with Lexie in this one... and he makes no apologies for
that. He calls it like it is -- no one can say Lexie doesn't know what
she's getting in to -- Alex couldn't have been more clear. She may get
laid, but she isn't getting a boyfriend. Not from him. Which she is Ok
with...

... Or, at least, she must think she's Ok with it. Lexie's struggling to
be hardcore herself. I don't know if I'd go so far as to say, perhaps,
this kind of struggle must run in the family, but... Okay. Fine. It must
run in the family -- because Lexie, though she's very different from
Meredith in many many ways, in this one way -- they seem to be exactly
alike.

Meredith and Lexie both want to succeed. They want to be strong. They
want to feel normal. They want, so much, to be whole. But it's a
struggle -- a genuine struggle for them. Being hardcore doesn't come
naturally. Sometimes, they have to fake it.

Which, in Lexie's case, means getting sexy with Alex.

But my favorite incarnation of being hardcore in this episode, of
course, comes in the form of the gentleman's evening. Maybe because it
reminds me of me and my Bad Girls. Or maybe because it's so fun to see
Derek and Mark try to figure out what the heck a gentleman's evening
actually is. (Monopoly is the perfect choice, by the way, because this
is Richard's gentleman's evening. Remember -- he's the guy who brought a
selection of soft cheeses with him to 'rough it' in the woods on the
camping trip.) And maybe it's because it's just so great to watch Erica
Hahn, on her first day of work at Seattle Grace, walk in, infiltrate the
evening, and make the guys squirm.

Now SHE is hardcore. Clearly. A welcome addition to Seattle Grace. It's
been a while since a kick ass female surgeon stepped into the mix to
shake things up. And the fact that it's Cristina's world she's going to
shake up the most? Even better. This is gonna be fun.

My point is -- being bad, being hardcore? It's all subjective. It's a
state of mind. It's different for every single one of us. It's an uber
competitive game of Monopoly on Derek's trailer porch. Or, it's Lexie
deciding she'll take Alex up on his offer of uncomplicated,
no-strings-attached sex. Or it's George curling up next to sweet,
frazzled Izzie, and deciding it's okay if they just...sleep tonight.
It's staying awake for your own open heart surgery. It's taking pride in
your job, even if today that just means holding a bloody wedding dress,
allllll day long... It's giving yourself permission to take that rare
day off of work so you can hop on a plane and spend some quality time
with your Bad Girls. Even if the most debaucherous thing you and your
Bad Girls do all weekend is fall asleep before 11pm and stay in bed the
next morning till noon. That's still TOTALLY hardcore. It's not lame at
all. Uh uh, no way. Sleep gives us strength. And you can't be hardcore
if you're all tired and cranky with bags under your eyes and --- Ok,
fine. Sleeping till noon isn't exactly hardcore. Whatever. You guys know
what I mean.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
