[] Zoanne Clack on "Where the Wild Things Are"...

Original Airdate: 4-24-08

Okay, before I start the blog, I wanted to mix this up a little in the
spirit of the episode. Let's have a contest. 10 points for whomever
tells me why Bailey's carrying her baby around all the time. 25 points
if you can tell me the name of the crazy tumor that Phillip ends up
having (no cheating by going back and looking!!! We're on the honor
system here!). 40 points for the guesser of the theme of this episode.
And here's the motherload, the "medical mystery" if you will: there are
lyrics to a song referenced within this blog (which also gives another
clue to the theme). 80 points for the person who can name the song (and
an extra 20 for the artist). Answers are in spoilers at the end
(remember: honor code people!).

Alright, you with me? Let's start this party right. I know I, for one,
have been a bottom-feeder for the last few months. A scavenger sitting
in the mud and spitting out rocks on the bottom of the fishtank,
flipping through my TIVO and watching umpteenth re-runs, models
modeling, mensa members losing to fifth graders, chefs making 20-course
meals out of garbanzo beans, and stars doing everything from dancing to
rehab to showing us their "other talents." Although I do admit that I
have been crazy inspired by The Biggest Loser. Love it. Can't get enough
of it. I sing the theme song to myself as I get up in the morning (What
have you done today, to make you feel proud...?) And the piece de la
resistance: Groomer Has It. Animal Planet. Feel the burn.

Did I mention I'm SO GLAD WE'RE BACK????!!! So glad prime-time network
TV is back and can fill my TIVO with sweet, yummy non-rerun fictional
candy again. Can I get an Amen?

So what's been going on in the 6 weeks (tv time) since we've been gone?
I've heard a lot of speculation out there, but Meredith is absolutely.
Not. Pregnant. Not even close. Hasn't even had sex. With anyone.
Meredith. Our beloved, "have-sex-instead-of-problems",
"meet-your-soul-mate-and-sleep-with-him-after-picking-him-up-in-a-bar"
Meredith. She's traded sex for... therapy? Therapy? Our Meredith? She
senses there's something wrong, something really wrong. But she can't
put her finger on it. Or can't admit what she's already put her finger
on. Therapy is interesting because it's the one place you get to talk
about yourself incessantly and someone actually LISTENS. They're
actually paid to listen to your drivel. And occasionally give you
mind-blowing assessments of your behavior. But Mer's not quite taking
full advantage of that. But it looks like there's some movement at the
end... we'll see what she does with that. Maybe it'll help her actually
start acting like a human being around Derek. They haven't spoken in the
entire six-week interim. Mer's been totally avoiding him and he's been
avoiding her. But they can't keep that up. They can't handle that. Deep,
deep down, on their basest levels, taking intellect out of the picture,
they belong together. They need each other. It's instinctual, base,
feral.

But what if it's not? What if all of their instincts are wrong, like
with Izzie? She put all of her blood, sweat and tears into Cheech, I
mean, Otis, and for what? Poor Izzie. It's time for her to figure out
who she wants to be and what kind of doctor she wants to be. On her own.
Not emulating Cristina, not fighting for lost causes, something where
she can take charge and find out what she's good at. Don't you think?
Thank God Richard's around to put everything into perspective for her.
Maybe her instincts weren't great, but she's human. And being human
ain't so bad.

Unless you're Cristina. When being human is bad. When being human means
that you have to go against all your natural instincts to win at all
costs. When being human means you have to put your tail between her legs
(figuratively speaking, of course) and sacrifice the win to get where
you want to go in life. To realize that sometimes in order to win,
you've got to lose -- you have to give up one thing to gain another.

What you gain can be what you need. Humans need human connection. And
when they don't get it, they tend to take it out on other people and not
realize what they're doing themselves. Who could I possibly be talking
about? Maybe a little guy we like to call George? George walking around
like a wounded lion. Pouncing on people left and right, trying not to
show the scars of being left out of his peer group. Poor Lexie got the
brunt of this... little did he know he had a friend right there, the
whole time, wanting to be there for him. And frickin' Lexie! There's
someone who needs to be loved. So sad. So vulnerable. Which kind of
actually makes her strong in a very co-dependent kind of "please like
me" kind of way. She's like a little puppy who works so hard to do right
and please their owner (except that puppies don't usually have the whole
alcoholic father part). Her pleasing puppy is in sharp contrast to
Alex's underdog, who's always fighting to keep his head above water. For
him, it's like a jungle sometimes, it makes him wonder how he keeps from
going under. There's something going on with him. With his past.
Something that doesn't fully let him reach his ultimate potential....
Hmmm, maybe we'll start finding out what that is soon. Every dog has its
day.

Humans also get jealous, and boy is that running rampant around Seattle
Grace. Cristina so wants to be in the Callie-Erica crowd and she's so
not. Callie and Erica are like birds of a feather now. They stick
together. And Cristina is not in any way a part of their flock. And what
about Mark? He's totally jealous of Derek. It's like Derek is the
prodigal wolf that strayed from the pack and Mark's been waiting for him
to come back, but Derek's not coming. Mark thought they'd go back to the
pre-Addison days where they were hunters on the prowl, spiders spinning
their webs. But Derek's already moved on to new prey. Already catching
someone new in his web.

And that somebody is Rose. During the time we haven't seen them they've
developed a bit of a mating ritual where she pretends she doesn't care
and tries to hold on to her iguana aloofness even in the face of the
overwhelming cuteness that is McDreamy. And for once, he's not trying to
hold back the McDreaminess. Usually reserved only for Meredith, he's
weaving his web and it's trapping Rose. The more she resists, the
tighter the web gets around her. I don't think she'll be fighting it
much more. But will Derek watch her struggle in his web, store her up
for later, or go for it? He seems pretty determined... she wants what he
wants. She's a real woman ready for a real relationship. And despite
Mark's incessant taunting, Derek's going to stay true to Derek.

As Bailey stays true to Bailey. Taking care of the hospital, the
residents, her baby, her life, and overall just being supreme ruler of
the universe that she is. But can she handle it all? Is she superwoman
or is she about to implode? Or perhaps even explode. I mean, she just
went through one of the biggest tragedies of her life, feeling like she
may have failed in protecting her own little bear cub. Then here comes
this literal mama bear that kills because her bear cub was just touched.
Overreaction? Or simply just instinct? Can Bailey's instincts be as
sharp as she thinks they can be? I think she really believes she can
handle it all. She is woman, hear her roar. She's also a doctor. And a
chief resident. A wife. A mother. (CAUTION: SPOILERS (answers) AHEAD!)
She's split up with her hubby and she's trying to get as much time with
Little Tuck as possible (10 points). She's a Mama Bear. Which is how we
got to our theme: Animal Instincts (40 points). A freakin' bear attacked
Phillip because he had a malignant glioma (25 points -- and I'll give it
to you if you guessed just "glioma") that was causing him to go against
his own natural instincts. Not to mention our residents are running
around the hospital like rodents, feeding off of the life (and death) of
the hospital.

And now for the ultimate. The motherload. The "medical mystery" of it
all. The 80-point monster:

The lyric was: It's like a jungle sometimes it makes me wonder how I
keep from going under... And the song is called "The Message" (circa
1982).

20-point bonus if you guessed Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five.

How'd you do? Max is 175...

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
