[] Stacy McKee on "Piece of My Heart"...

Original Airdate: 5-1-08

I have a confession to make. About the character of Addison: I love her.
Not vagina monologue kind of love -- but love none the less.

I love her sense of humor. I love her friendships with Callie and
Bailey. I love how she's always known exactly how to call Derek out on
exactly whatever it is he needs to be called out on. I love how good she
is at her job. I love that she's basically Sloan's McDreamy -- even if
his feelings aren't reciprocated. I love that she loves potato chips. I
love that she walks the hospital halls in heels that any normal woman
would twist her ankle in... I love Addison. And I love that this was her
episode to come back to Seattle for a visit.

The nice thing about bringing Addison back right now is that -- she's
been gone a while. She hasn't been privy to most of the Seattle Grace
shenanigans since her departure. So she's uniquely qualified to walk
back through the doors at SGH and call things like she sees them. She
can react the way we're all secretly reacting to Derek Christopher
Shepherd pining away for someone OTHER than Meredith Grey. She can
notice just how much her good friend Callie seems to jive with newbie
Erica Hahn... and Addison can get Bailey to admit (the way Bailey would
NEVER admit to someone she saw and worked with everyday) that she is
really struggling right now, just to keep it together.

Addison is a perfect sounding board because a lot of our characters
don't have sounding boards of their own right now. Addison is a safe
confidant. She can take in everyone's uncertainty, their panic, their
pain... and take it right back to LA with her when she leaves. No one
needs to worry about their friends and colleagues at SGH seeing the
cracks in their armor. Which is good. Because right now -- there are a
lot of cracks.

For instance, Izzie. She's floundering right now. She's all on her own
and trying to figure things out for herself -- but "on her own" is not
exactly a comfortable place for Izzie to be... She doesn't have the same
kind of connection with George that she used to have; he's got Lexie
now, and all of his other intern friends. Izzie's not at the top of her
game professionally -- she's not finding her medical stride like
Meredith or Cristina. Izzie's doing the opposite; she's hiding out in
the clinic where even there her patients are requesting different
doctors. Then there's Ava/Rebecca/Jane Doe. Izzie learns Rebecca isn't
actually pregnant, but what can she do with that information? As George
and Lexie would say -- she's coded. Hard.

Cristina's also starting to crack as Erica continues to shut her down
over and over and over. The moment in surgery when Erica gives Alex
props, and not Cristina -- after Cristina is the one who massaged the
baby's heart back to life -- for me, that has always been a turning
point for Cristina. In that moment, I've always imagined that Cristina's
world probably flashes before her eyes-- Cristina can't help but compare
her relationship with Erica Hahn to how trusted and encouraged she
always was with Burke. The moment leaves Cristina a little raw, which is
why she's able to confront Hahn later at the bar. But even when
confronted, Erica's explanation to Cristina isn't exactly something
Cristina can take a lot of comfort in...

Then there's Callie -- and Erica. And the vagina monologues, which --
actually -- I'm choosing not to blog about. This is one story you should
just watch and enjoy. Anything I might say about it now will simply step
on your enjoyment of what's to come, so...

On to Derek. Who is all sorts of conflicted over working with Meredith
on this clinical trial. On one hand, Meredith is finally shining
professionally -- and Derek doesn't want to let her down. He wants her
to shine, he wants to help her if he can... but on the other hand, he
knows the reality of this clinical trial; he knows there are ridiculous
risks. He also knows that the closer he and Meredith work together, the
harder it will be for him if he can't help her make medical history.
She's expecting greatness, and he isn't sure he can deliver on that,
which only feeds his anxiety about performing this first clinical trial
surgery.

By the way, I would just like to point out that I've been writing on
Grey's since Season One, and Phillip, the clinical trial patient, is the
first patient I've ever killed in one of my episodes. I made the mistake
of mentioning this fact in the writer's room one day, and I'm pretty
sure that had something to do with Shonda's insistence that Phillip must
die (never mind that the story really doesn't work if he lives. This is
all about me. Obviously.) At any rate, I am no longer a patient killing
virgin. Just wanted to point that out.

Finally, there's Alex. And Ava. Or Rebecca. Or whatever you want to call
her... Here's something you should know about this story -- we debated a
long long time as to whether or not we should reveal in this episode --
or a few episodes down the line -- that Rebecca isn't actually pregnant.
In fact, even at our table read for this episode, it ended with Izzie
looking at lab results, and uttering a little "Oh my god" -- but nothing
else. And you should have heard the reaction -- WHAT DO THE LAB RESULTS
SAY?!?!? -- which, ultimately, is part of why we decided to at least
answer that part of the question in the same episode we introduce it.

This is a story about Alex. Not about an unwanted pregnancy. Not about
some unborn baby. It's about Alex and what he's getting ready to go
through emotionally. What he's willing and not willing to do. This is
about his journey through the rest of the season -- so we didn't want to
tease you guys with some faux pregnancy story that ultimately just felt
like a stunt. By letting you know now that Rebecca isn't actually
pregnant -- then letting you watch Alex take his next few steps forward
from this point on... Suddenly the entire arc has a much darker, more
interesting underbelly. For instance -- think about that last image of
Alex reaching over and touching Rebecca's belly... SO much more weird
and creepy when you know what Alex doesn't. It's a moment that, for
Alex, is filled with something tender and sweet and maybe even a little
bit hopeful... only... for us, so not.

Before I sign off, I just wanted to draw your attention to something
addressed in this episode - the fact that an HIV positive pregnant
woman, with proper prenatal care, has less than a 2% chance of passing
HIV on to her unborn baby. It's a piece of medical information most
people don't fully understand or realize (I know I didn't) -- including
a few doctors. Which is pretty remarkable, really. If you're interested
in learning more, you can click here:
http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/perinatal/index.htm

And that's that. Addison has come and gone. Ava's pregnant, but not. Mer
and Der are (sort of) killing terminal patients for sport. Callie may or
may not be speaking vagina monologues. And -- I just realized -- if
you're reading this before watching tonight's episode then... well... I
just spoiled a bunch of stuff for you -- which is your fault for reading
the blogs before watching the episodes anyway! Two words: Ya Coded.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
