[] Krista Vernoff on "Here Comes The Flood"...

Original Airdate: 10-9-08

Absurd. A flood. In a hospital. Those absurd, desperate writers. I know
that's what some of you are thinking. But here's the thing... Back in
June, when we were just gathering together to begin early discussions of
season five, my sister Jennifer came over for dinner. Jenn is a shrink.
I'm sure she has a more official title than that, but I go with shrink
cause she's my sister and she lets me. She works in a psychiatric
hospital in the San Fernando Valley and her patients are mostly low
functioning schizophrenics. So she came over for dinner and I said "How
was your day?" and she said, "You mean aside from the hospital
flooding?" And I looked at her like, seriously? And she said, "Yeah, we
had to move all the patients to one wing. All the schizophrenic
patients, piled on top of each other in one small wing of the hospital.
That was my day." And I said, without skipping a beat, "And that is my
episode. Just so you know." So as absurd as it may seem? Real. And in
real life it was even weirder cause all the patients were CRAZY PEOPLE.
Awesome.

I think it's appropriate that Jenn inspired this episode because in a
way, this episode is written as a love letter to therapy. What it all
comes down to for me is what Dr. Wyatt says to Meredith in the elevator,
"And happiness in the face of horrible is not the goal. Feeling the
horrible stuff and knowing that you're not gonna die from the feelings?
That's goal." Nothing better than a good shrink. I love therapy and I
love what's it done for Meredith in the short amount of time she's gone
(and I'm bummed she quit before she could get to the really good stuff.)
It's hard -- to peel away the layers of the onion that is you and look
at all that juice cause it burns your eyes and makes you cry and makes
you hurt and makes you feel...but it also makes you better. (Oh my God,
talk about a tortured metaphor. Sorry. I'm tired. We're in the room
breaking episode 12.)

Point is, I'm proud of Meredith that she got as far as she did. And I
love that last scene where she stands up to Derek. She doesn't get
drunk. She doesn't freak out. She doesn't walk away. She doesn't ignore
him. She doesn't leave him. She just stands there and tells him her
truth. And that is so so so hard and so so so scary for her (as it is
for a lot of us.) And what I love most is the look of shock on her face
when it works. It's so hard to change. For everyone I know, change and
growth are deeply difficult tasks. And so it makes me happy for Meredith
and Derek that they are taking baby steps toward happiness and function.

When we were shooting that scene, Ellen expressed concern to me about
her question to Derek at the end. "You still love me?" She was concerned
that it sent a message to the girls and women who watch our show that a
man's love is the thing that matters most. (But she didn't say the girls
and women who watch our show. She said "the future Coco's of the world."
Cause Coco's my daughter, and Ellen's no dummy, she knows how to get a
writer to listen!) But my feeling is this: I was not trying to say that
a man's love is what matters most. I was trying to say that the ability
to know and trust that you (and by you I mean, me, Meredith, all of us)
are lovable. To be willing to stand in your truth, stand in your
vulnerability, stand in your fear, stand at your breaking point and hold
on to yourself -- that's what matters. And that's what surprises
Meredith. She's shocked that she's allowed to be herself and someone
loves her anyway. Those of us who grew up in the sometimes loving but
sometimes terrifying and sometimes cataclysmic way that Meredith grew
up? We sometimes need to learn, and need to be reminded, more than once,
that we are lovable just as we are. Ellen got on board -- and I thought
she delivered the moment beautifully.

Tell you what else I love in this episode: Alex. On the porch. When he
says "Hello" to Izzie. I tell you, that Justin Chambers can do any
freaking thing you throw at him. There was some discussion when the
script came out of whether or not we should change that "Hello" to "Hi"
which sounds more like Alex. But Justin? He pulled it off so
beautifully. He made it sound like Alex and then some. The vulnerability
under that one word... The subtlety... I just thought it was exquisite
work.

Speaking of psychology, which I wasn't just now, I was speaking of
Justin but I've learned that when you say "speaking of" something,
people usually go with you. It's lazy, but I'm tired so... Speaking of
psychology, how 'bout Cristina? (I've never sat around with my sister
Jenn and diagnosed the characters on this show the way I've sat around
with her diagnosing every member of my own family, but I bet that would
be a fascinating conversation.) Cause we know there's actually a good
and caring person somewhere inside Cristina. I mean, she cares enough
about Meredith to storm Wyatt's office, right? And Wyatt gets right away
how vulnerable she is. How scared she is. (Even if she can't admit it)
But still -- she totally stole Izzie's apartment! And she didn't even
mean to! Izzie thinks she's being evicted, and Cristina somehow
convinces herself that Izzie pulled that flyer off the wall for her! I
love it. We're currently breaking episode 12 of season 5 and I've been
here since episode 1 of season 1 -- and I never get tired of writing
these characters. And you know why? It's cause so many of them so badly
need a good shrink!

Derek, who's generally a pretty great guy and who just promised Mer he'd
take baby steps, assumes her roommates are moving out. Just assumes it
-- without even a discussion. I mean, seriously, entitled much???

Alex, who clearly still has feelings for Izzie, is as mean as he can be
to her until the very end -- when maybe he's thinking his luck's gonna
turn. And even then, all he can say is hello.

Mark Sloan, a double board certified ENT and plastic surgeon who
normally doesn't give the time of day to an intern, stops to listen to
Lexie's diagnosis. Which either makes him a better teacher than we
thought or a guy who simply, physically cannot walk away when a pretty
girl is talking (I'm still not sure which.)

George is about to have some kind of actual breakdown in anticipation of
his test (and it makes me giggle that the proctor finds him "a nice
quiet room up in psych.")

Lexie is codependent to an almost pathological degree -- turning down
Sloan's surgery so she can help George with the Chief's scut.

Izzie who is generally the happiest person we know, has ended up somehow
all alone. Callie and Erica seem to be discovering some real truths
about themselves pretty late in life.

And the Chief? The Chief is basically watching while the hospital
crumbles around him because his fear and pride won't let him acknowledge
that the hospital is crumbling around him!

And Bailey -- her lack of power is TORTURING HER. I love that little
moment when she goes to the gallery to get a quiet moment and you can
see her giving herself a tiny little talking to... I imagine her saying,
"Do not quit! Do not tell the Chief to go screw himself! Do not say out
loud ANY of what you're thinking, Miranda Bailey!" And then of course
the ceiling caves in giving her the ultimate vindication. I love these
characters. I love the messiness and the layers and the fact that they
absolutely refuse to behave or to "get all whole and healed," as
Meredith would say. I think if I wasn't a writer, I'd be a shrink. Jenn
and I could open a practice together and then sit around every night and
laugh about how crazy we all are. That would be fun.

I have to add before I go how much I loved the guest stars in this
episode. The actor Jim Ortlieb who played Jack O'Brien (get it? Jack O
Brien. J.O.B. Job. Biblical. Whatever.) was so funny and subtle and
heartbreaking and that lovely actress Samantha Quan who played
Shelley... I watched them shoot that scene plus I've seen this episode 3
or 4 times now plus I wrote it and I still cry every time she breaks
down at the unfairness of getting terminal cancer in your 20's. And
Daniel Travanti who played Mr. Patmore? His breakdown? Kills me every
time. I did not expect that performance. I did not script that he would
cry. I pictured something totally different. And then I got the dailies
of that scene and it just wrecked me with it's awesomeness. I love good
actors. Yay, good actors!

I am rambling. I get that. I'm tired, like I said. But I hope you liked
this episode and I hope more than that that you had a lovely summer.
Because life is weird and hard and scary sometimes. People are diagnosed
with terminal cancer in their twenties and people get debilitating pain
for reasons no one can diagnose and hospitals flood and ceilings
collapse and lives fall apart, sometimes out of nowhere... So I hope
very much that you are all enjoying the quieter moments, the moments in
between the breaking points. I hope you kiss your kids a lot and tell
your spouses and parents that you love them a lot and buy yourself
flowers a lot for no good reason. I hope you love your life. And if for
some reason you don't or can't -- I hope you find a really good shrink
like my sister Jenn or Dr. Wyatt. Cause therapy rocks.

End of love letter.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
