[] Mark Wilding on "Life During Wartime"...

Original Airdate: 10-30-08

First things first. No animals were harmed in the filming of my episode.
None. I know ABC ran that thing before the show started that told you
that, but I figured you should hear it from me too. Those four pigs were
entirely and utterly fake. Fake, fake, fake. From their little piggy
tails to their glistening piggy snouts, they were nothing but plastic
and fiberglass and possibly straw for the whiskers. Even their breathing
was fake. It came courtesy of some guy who stood just off camera and
pumped an air hose (or something similarly technical that I couldn't
explain in a million years). What WAS real is the issue of using animals
to teach and perfect surgical technique. Like Derek says in the episode,
it's not ideal, but a lot of hospitals in this country use live animals
for procedures where surgical mannequins have yet to successfully
replicate trauma to humans. Things like blood volume loss -- something
else I probably couldn't explain in a million years. Anyhow, I thought
we were pretty evenhanded in dealing with the issue of animal testing. I
heard from both sides as we were shooting the episode (boy, did I hear).
Compelling arguments were made on BOTH sides -- including one surgeon
who told me that a day after learning to do open heart surgery on a pig,
she used the same technique on a human being THE NEXT DAY. She told me
point blank, without a doubt in her mind, that if she hadn't learned
that procedure there's no way she would have saved that person's life.

At any rate, I thought it was a cool way to bring back Major Owen Hunt.
Even if people were appalled by what he did, his goal in the wet lab was
to teach people. And to teach them the best way he knows how. Teaching,
incidentally, is one of our major themes this year. See one, do one,
teach one. You want to move up from being the number 12 hospital in the
country, you've gotta fight that fight on all fronts. Be it operating on
pigs, hiring better doctors or doing a better job with the doctors who
are already here. Anyway, I think we came to understand Owen's attitude
toward the pigs at the end of the episode when he tells Cristina about
losing all his army buddies in the RPG attack. If you've seen 19 of your
friends die in one day, it tends to make other things in your life not
seem quite as important or dramatic. My wife really doesn't care what
Owen (Kevin McKidd) does or doesn't do to pigs. She's just glad to see
him back at Seattle Grace. REALLY, REALLY GLAD. Much like Cristina, she
just thinks he's cool and sexy as hell (I'm not either of those things
so I just make up lame excuses why she can't visit the set and meet him
-- he's a leper, he's got TB, he's allergic to blondes -- whatever will
keep her at bay). At any rate, he and Cristina make for a really
interesting couple -- even if he didn't remember her name!

Speaking of names, I loved Meredith remembering the silly names she gave
Anatomy Jane's organs. But if unearthing Anatomy Jane brings out
Meredith's playful side, it does just the opposite for the Chief. He,
like Owen, is fighting his own set of demons. Always lurking somewhere
in the back of his mind is the fact that his behavior as a young man
somehow destroyed Meredith's life. She never had the army Tori Begler
has. She never had people looking out for her. People who could protect
her from life's vicissitudes. So when that doll suddenly re-appears, so
does the Chief's guilt. I don't know if that's something he'll ever be
able to resolve because I don't think those kinds of things are easily
resolved, even in real life. There are some things you just can't
forgive yourself for. In my wife's case, it's her attraction to Kevin
McKidd. I'm sure, at some point in her life, she'll feel very, very
guilty about that.

As for some of our other couples...I can never get enough of Izzie and
Alex. He's trying to be a good boyfriend and going about it in a typical
Alex way. So that when Owen tells Derek and Mark that he wants to know
what he did wrong with the scalp patient, Alex is all ears. As well as
he knows Izzie, in many ways she's still a foreign country to him. She
has different customs and ways. You can either dismiss those customs and
ways or try to learn to do things differently. In much the same way,
Callie and Erica have yet to...calibrate. If that's the word. They're
moving at different speeds into their relationship. Callie's more
hesitant, maybe not sure she wants to throw herself one hundred percent
into this thing. While Erica sees the leaves on the trees for God's
sake! Meanwhile George and Lexie have reached a truce of sorts. I have
to say, I loved that last scene where she made him a dinner of macaroni
and cheese.

Bailey, of course, is pretty much trying to drive up Seattle Grace's
ranking by herself. From her domino surgery to removing six organs at
one go, she's on fire. She's not letting anything or anyone (namely
Erica Hahn) get in her way. When Tori's father talks about hospitals and
how doctors ignore you or don't talk to each other or somehow lose sight
of what they're here for -- to do the best they can for the patient --
it's hard for me to clump Bailey in that group. But even she can
occasionally get sidetracked (only to be set back on course by the
Chief). Still, at the end, when the Chief is looking in at the Beglers
all crowding around Bailey, we get the impression (or at least I hope
you got it) that she's well on her way to succeeding him as the best
general surgeon at Seattle Grace.

As for getting back to being one of the top hospitals in the country?
Our doctors have a ways to go and lot of battles to fight. Like my
wife's latest Seattle Grace crush, Mr. Owen Hunt tells Derek and Mark,
this is still pretty much Day One for them...

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
