[] Joan Rater On "In The Midnight Hour"...

Original Airdate: 11-20-08

Okay, it's a little crazy to try to take out an appendix. I get that. I
think Lexie and Sadie and all the interns get that. IT'S CRAZY TO TAKE
OUT AN APPENDIX! But here's the thing -- it's the middle of the night.
And an appendectomy is the easiest surgery you can do. And they've seen
them done a lot. And they've done them on the practice dummy guy, IStan.
And they're competitive and feel like their residents aren't letting
them do anything and, I think it bears repeating ... it's the middle of
the night. When all things are possible. It's not the middle of the
night as I write this, but it's late, 11 pm, and I'm feeling like maybe
I'll wake up early and exercise before work. I probably won't, cause
like ... um ... I never have ... but it's late and under cover of
darkness ... all things feel possible.

Which brings me to Izzie. I'll get back to the interns because more
needs to be said -- THEY TOOK OUT SADIE'S APPENDIX!- but Izzie ... Izzie
just touched Denny -- talking, breathing, right here in her bedroom
Denny -- and she's just sitting there at the beginning of the episode
wondering what's going on, it's not possible that he's here, because he
died, but he's here and he's talking and now he's walking toward her and
now he's unbuckling his belt and .... Crazy. Unreal. Impossible. But
.... I think Izzie is thinking that tonight she's going to let this be
possible. In the confines of her room she's going to let this be real.
But it's complicated and scary. She and Alex are finally good, really
good and so what is this, why is Denny here, why can't she just move on?
And I think she thinks she will -- tomorrow, in the morning, as I'm
exercising, she'll be all moving on and stuff, but tonight .... Tonight
why can't she just let miracles happen, turn off her scientist brain and
just be in that moment, the two of them, finally alone together? And by
the way, I don't think she thinks it's cheating on Alex. I really don't.
Because Denny's dead. Whatever this is, whatever he is, Izzie knows this
isn't real, she KNOWS that, but it feels real and she just ... closes
her eyes and, you heard the sounds coming from the room, as Meredith
said, it sounded kinda porny, so whatever's going on with the dead guy,
the sex is good at least ... But by morning, in the light of day, when
appendixes have been removed and you realize you can't stay in your room
with your dead ex-boyfriend forever, she chooses Alex and it's sad as
she looks at Denny who seems sad, but he gets it, after all he's "here
for her ..."

Back to the appendix. Sadie's appendix. Did you hear Sadie say to Lexie
that Meredith is wrong about her, maybe Lexie isn't such a priss? And
the look on Lexie's face, "Meredith thinks I'm a priss?" And that is
what takes Lexie over the edge in the middle of the night and makes her
go, yeah, we can do this, why not? How hard can it be to take out an
appendix?

Sidenote- I had these hedges, really overgrown. And my husband, who
usually trims the hedges wasn't home, so I said to myself, how hard can
it be to trim hedges? I trimmed one side and then the other, and then I
had to even out the first side and then I cut too much and had to go
back and then the whole thing looked like CRAP but I had to fix it and
then I just started whacking away like a crazy person and then my
husband came home and said in a voice that he usually reserves for our 5
year old. "Honey, put down the hedge clippers and step away from the
hedge."

I think that's what happened a little. In the OR as opposed to my front
yard. Things were fine and then they weren't and when Meredith and
Cristina walked into that horrible scene and saw Sadie on the table and
intern Ryan and Lexie just looking shellshocked and horrified, it was
like, "Put down the scalpel and step away from the table".

Here's what I love -- Meredith and Cristina rocked that surgery. They
stayed calm, they did it, and in doing so they showed everyone -- the
Chief, Bailey, themselves -- how far they've come as doctors. And Bailey
was there to see it and take a little bit of pride in the fact that she
raised her babies, she taught them right from wrong, now it's their turn
to do the same thing to their interns ...

Speaking of Bailey, how about the scene with her and Callie where she
talks about how she's come to resent the appendix for getting infected
and needing to removed? She resents a surgery that our residents are so
excited to perform. And that gives her pause. Seeing their passion,
missing that passion in herself, makes her wonder if maybe she needs a
change ...

And Mark and Derek. I love their friendship. And I think Mark does too,
which is why he doesn't want to mess it up. But seriously -- he didn't
think of Lexie in THAT WAY until Derek mentioned it. It is Derek's
fault. But when we find out how Derek's mom took Mark in, took in a
stray, we see a new side of Mark and I've got to say, I love it. That he
sees how in distress Lexie is and tells Derek to take her home ... or he
will ...

Meredith and Cristina's fight. Cristina lost the solo surgery and feels
that it's unfair that she should take the hit for this, that Meredith
should have stood up for her more, but I get when Meredith asks, "what
did you want me to say?" Meredith's friend almost died, Meredith's "sort
of but not really" sister is probably going to get kicked out of the
program ... and Cristina knew intern fight club was going on?!! I like
that they are both right and that there are no easy answers and that
it's complicated and messy.

Speaking of complicated ... um ... Major Dr. Owen Hunt. Complicated. And
tortured. Words fail him all night, so that when he finally finds his
words and tells Cristina he thinks she's beautiful ... it's so
surprising and nice and she gets this look on her face. It's like she
softens for just a split second. It's not what she was expecting to
hear, he's not who she thought he was, and I like that they are both
complicated and they sit on the stoop as the sun comes up on a new day
and they can just be quiet together.

Because that's the thing about morning. It eventually comes and when it
does, your life and the people in it, who you've become, decisions
you've made either look good by the light of day or just illuminate how
far off course you've gone.

Izzie realizes she can't stay holed up in her room, Ggeorge opens his
eyes to the fact that Lexie has been in love with him and he's been so
preoccupied he hasn't seen it, Derek realizes that he needs to "bring
home a stray" and when he does, Meredith is grateful. Alex tells Izzie,
I can handle your crazy, if you want to break up with me, that's on you.
It's like the residents are growing up, especially in comparison to the
interns who probably just wish they could take it all back.

So ... it's morning as I finish this. And I didn't get up early. The
alarm went off and I decided I'd sleep in. But tonight's another night,
filled with possibilities, and I bet I'll set that alarm again and one
of these days, maybe, it's possible, I'll get to the gym and work out.
How hard can it be?

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
