[] Debora Cahn on "Wish You Were Here"...

Original Airdate: 1-8-09

Cristina and Meredith are fighting. I hate it when they fight. They're
so damn miserable. You'd think maybe they'd enjoy it. Worthy opponents,
squaring off. Throw down of the century. But no. Not even Cristina, who
usually relishes the opportunity to tear anyone a new one, seems like
this is just eating away at her soul. Where's the sense of fun? Of
sport? Can't they try to get into the spirit of it? No. They both look
kind of oxygen deprived. And that's really what it's like. You go
through something like surgical residency -- it's a program designed to
almost kill you. Like boot camp, but it goes on for years. How do you
get through it? For Mer and Cristina, you survive by having a person by
your side -- minute by minute, trauma by trauma. Someone who will make
you laugh when you have part of a dead person's lymph node in your hair.
Someone who will tell you your attending's a brainless chinless douche
bag when he's just spent twenty hours explaining why you're a moron.
Someone who's in it with you. And without that someone -- it's just
torture. The days are grueling. The work is relentless. The satisfaction
is nonexistent. It's miserable. Without your other half... it's like
breathing without the oxygen. But Mer's got Derek, shouldn't that help?
Not really. It's not the same kind of other half. He's there for her
when it's all over, but he's not in it. He may remember what it was like
to be a resident, but probably it's like women who go through labor. It
sucks just badly enough that something in your brain makes you forget.
It's hazy for Derek, the days in the trenches. He's probably grown a
little nostalgic about it. He can't remember what it was really like.

And Owen... wouldn't it be great if Cristina had Owen to turn to? Sure,
he'd be like Derek -- not a replacement for Meredith, but still. He'd be
something. Wouldn't we all feel a little better? So why can't he get his
damn act together? Why is he so damn hot and cold all the time? Why?
He's big and strapping and gorgeous and brilliant and capable and
strapping and gorgeous, why is he such a basket case? Cristina doesn't
trust people. She just doesn't come to it naturally. But here he is,
holding out a hand, or at least a cup of coffee. She decided to let him
in... and every time she comes to him in a moment of need, he's totally
checked out. Don't you want to just smack him upside the head?

And while we're smacking people upside the head... CHIEF RICHARD WEBBER.
WHAT THE @#$%? I think that's the real problem, for everyone, on this
particular day. The Chief has checked out. He's on strike. Gone. It's
like the center of gravity stopped pulling, and everyone's about to slip
off the face of the planet. Bailey, for a change, is the only one who
really notices what's going on. But there's not a whole hell of a lot
she can do about it. He's known his hospital dropped to #12 for weeks.
But he never really looked at it. Never really felt what it meant. It
was a number somewhere on a chart. It sucked, but it didn't change
anything. Right up until Jordan Kenley dropped dead on a patient's bed
(that poor traumatized child) and the Chief discovered no good pediatric
surgeon wanted to come here and take his place. Devastating. The Chief's
never experienced anything like that. He never had to ask, never mind
beg, surgeons to come to this hospital. They were clamoring at the door.
And now... people don't want to work here? Add him to the list of people
who are trying to walk the halls without oxygen. Except he had the good
sense to lie down, in a dark room, and put a Do Not Disturb sign on the
door.

And Derek. Saving the life of a serial killer. When all he can do is
look in the guy's eyes and imagine the face of the man who shot his dad.

And Mark Sloan... Mark Sloan who could always find happiness, or at
least some brief gratification, in an on-call room, with pretty much
anyone, but certainly with Callie, Mark Sloan is falling, hard, for the
Littlest Grey. And his conscience, which has always been buried pretty
deep, won't let him have her. He betrayed Derek once. It was a biggie.
And he can't do it again. Despite the fact that Lexie's trotting around
him like a happy puppy. He can't go there. Won't. Talk about lack of
oxygen...

People are having a really crappy day.

Except Izzie. Who couldn't really be happier. So she hangs out with a
dead guy, it's a detail. She's got the two loves of her life by her
side. And they're kind of getting in a pissing contest with each other,
where the best way to win is to impress her in the sack. Or in an exam
room. Really anywhere with a horizontal surface. So she's a friggin
whack job, she's having a great time. And Alex, who thankfully has had
enough crazy women in his life that Izzie's confession about seeing dead
people strikes him as pretty close to normal... Alex is cool with it.
That's the nice thing about being raised by a boozer and a junkie, it
takes a lot to flip you out.

So... to the skeptics... to those who wonder why we let this woman spend
her time with a dead guy, A DEAD MAN, WE SAW HIM DIE, WE'RE REALLY QUITE
SURE HE'S NOT THE KIND OF PERSON YOU SPEND TIME WITH... It makes her
happy. And she's the only one who is. She wished he were here. And her
wish came true. That's supposed to make you happy. It often doesn't. Be
careful what you wish for, and all that. But sometimes it does.
Sometimes it makes you really happy. So he's dead. Why get bogged down
in the details?

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
