[] Mark Wilding on "Stairway to Heaven"...

I am going to tell you something about myself that you probably already
suspect. Which is...I don't know any serial killers. None. Not a one. I
grew up in a small university town in Connecticut and our crimes ran
more towards shoplifting, speeding and disturbing the peace. No William
Dunn types hanging out at the local Friendly's ice cream parlor or
exchanging warm hello's at the Coventry Farmers' Market. My brushes with
any kind of criminal element pretty much extended to what my younger
brother, Dave, was up to that day. Be it shooting out a neighbor's
window with a BB gun or throwing a snowball at the high school principal
-- the principal for God's sake! -- Dave was the closest thing to an
actual criminal that I knew. (Of course, to this day my brother denies
shooting out the window with a BB gun. But then, that's what criminals
do, right? They deny.)

Anyway, you get the idea. Bucolic small town, God-fearing folks, blah
blah blah. Except that now I'm going to tell you something that you
don't know about me. Which is that even though I don't know any serial
killers, I do know a killer. That's right. Someone who murdered another
human being. The murderer was someone I grew up with. He was in my
grade. We went to middle school and high school together. We even went
to college together. I even had the occasional beer with him in college.
And now he's sitting in a Texas prison for murdering his wife. To be
more precise, for poisoning his wife with arsenic. Which, from all the
accounts I read, was a pretty horrible way to go. And guess what? He
really was one of the nicest guys you'll ever meet.

My point being that even though I know a charming, well-mannered
murderer, when Shonda floated the idea that we do our own version of a
charming serial killer -- someone that we couldn't help but like -- I
wasn't that on board with the idea. After all, a killer's a killer,
right? No amount of charm or politeness can mitigate THAT. But then we
got Eric Stoltz and I started to see the light. Not all the light, but
some of it. Eric's a great actor and very charming. But myself and
others in the writers room still weren't convinced. We argued back and
forth about what kind of killer we should have. Because if Meredith is
going to have compassion for him, shouldn't he at least be a guy who
killed for a reason? To defend himself? Or to put some poor soul out of
their misery? Does he have to be someone who just killed people for no
good reason? And Shonda said he DID have to be someone who killed people
for no good reason. But, we countered, wouldn't that reflect poorly on
Meredith? Being best buds with an utterly irredeemable serial killer??
No it wouldn't, insisted Shonda. Compassion is compassion. And as Jenna
Bans pointed out in her wonderful episode last week -- it's a lot easier
to have compassion for a sick person than for a serial killer. Well, as
you saw at the end of the episode last night, Shonda was right. As
horrible a human being as he was, when it came down to it, when William
Dunn walked into that death chamber and looked at Meredith (and looked
and looked) I really didn't want him to be killed. And I'm someone who's
not completely against the death penalty. (I go back and forth. On the
one hand feeling that if you deprive someone of their life, shouldn't
you be deprived of yours? While on the other hand, not being terribly
happy about the fact that sometimes they execute the wrong guy).

The first and most obvious relationship that needs commenting on is
Cristina and Meredith's. Yes folks, the rift is finally over. And it
ended the way most rifts end. Not with profound apologies on either side
but with the sense that this argument has just gone on too long, that
life's too short to prolong the misery. How many great friends do you
get in your life? Like real soul mate friends? And do you want to lose
that soul mate friend over something that, a month later, now seems
trivial? Meredith and Cristina are a couple of strong personalities. I
don't know that we could ever have gotten them to offer up mutual
apologies -- with both of them shouldering a measure of the blame -- and
actually believe it as an audience. And Derek pretty much spoke for the
viewers when he said isn't it about time to wrap up the fighting -- that
Meredith and Cristina need each other. If only to freak out to each
other when something really big happens. In this case, a possible
proposal. And even though it looked like Derek might be so put off by
Meredith's charitable behavior towards William that he would never
propose, we got the nice, lump in the throat, surprise at the end of the
episode when Derek shows up outside the prison. A nice surprise because
a couple of seasons ago, he might have been so disgusted with her
behavior that he might not have shown up. I think that gestures shows
that their relationship is really maturing. That's what happens in
relationships. If you want to keep it going, you forgive things that
bother the crap out of you. If you DON'T want to keep it going, you dump
the person. Or divorce them. You should not, under any circumstances,
poison them with arsenic. That is bad.

There are two other relationships that I want to comment on. First, Mark
and Lexie. A couple that I grow more and more fond of every week. I
loved that the humor of him breaking his penis -- it really does happen,
people, you can look it up -- becomes something very moving at the end,
when Lexie ignores his request to get out of his room and, instead,
crawls into bed with him. Mark has never been in such pain and she's
going to be there for him, whether he wants it or not. On paper their
relationship looks like it can't possibly work. He's an attending and a
man whore. She's an intern and all sweetness and light. But time and
again we've shown that Lexie's also a lot stronger than she looks. If
she wants something, she'll eventually figure out a way to get it. In
this case, that something is Mark. At this point we're not sure where
this relationship is going but I promise you that this is one of those
story lines that we, the writers, really want to get right. We're
enjoying it too much not to.

And finally, we get to Izzie and Denny. Now here's a story line a lot of
folks have had a strong opinion about. Starting with Denny coming back
(WHAT?), Izzie finally breaking the ice and talking to him(REALLY?
REALLY??), Izzie having long conversations with him (NO WAY!), Izzie
having imaginary, albeit spectacular, sex with him (OKAY, THIS CHICK IS
CRAZY), and Izzie pulling a sort of modern day "Jules and Jim",
balancing the two men in her life (REALLY, HONESTLY, SHE NEEDS TO BE
COMMITTED). Anyway, I'd say that since we started the story line,
opinions have run two to one against the whole thing. Or at least they
were before this episode. Maybe now some of you doubters will be swayed.
I'm not saying EVERYONE will be on board, just maybe a few of you. We
didn't bring back Jeffrey Dean Morgan just because he's a super looking
guy who can act the hell out of stuff, we brought him back for a reason.
Izzie is sick. We don't know how bad it is or whether Denny is some sort
of hallucination or weird manifestation of her sickness, but now at
least the thing's on her radar. Now she can do something about it. So
stick with us. It's going to be a fun ride. After all, if I was able to
come around on the whole charming, serial killer thing, you guys might
just come around on this.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
