[] Jenna Bans on "I Will Follow You Into The Dark"...

Original Airdate: 3-12-09

Okay, people...step away from the comment section...step away from the
phone (no one at ABC's gonna answer at this hour anyway, trust me)...and
hear a writer out. I know what you're all thinking -- HOW COULD THEY
HUMILIATE SHADOW SHEPHERD LIKE THAT!? Just kidding. We'll talk Mer/Der
and the bat and the ring, we will, but first I would actually like to
start with Shadow Shepherd, 'cause he's part of the bigger issue here
which is...

Derek Shepherd is not in a good place right now. In fact, dude's pretty
much at his worst. Remember when our friendly neighborhood serial killer
Eric Stolz told him they had a lot in common? Derek's started to believe
him. What I love about this storyline, besides that it gives the
talented Patrick Dempsey a chance to show us just how big his acting
range is, is that you'd never think it would happen to Shepherd.
Shepherd knows brains like I know...well, nothing. Maybe chocolate. But
the point is, he's not just a star in his field, he runs his field. It's
like the Pope having a crisis of faith. And everyone's feeling it --
Mark, literally with his maimed hand, Richard, who can't possibly run
his surgical floor without his star neurosurgeon...and sad little Shadow
Shepherd, who finally gets his shot to impress his colleagues, and not
one of them can even remember his name. (Even writing the script, I
couldn't keep it straight. When Darren, our script coordinator, was
clearing the names, he'd call me and be like -- so, it's John, but
everyone keeps calling him Jim, right? And I'd be all, yes. Wait, no.
Wait, yes.) And it's not because he's not a good surgeon, it's just with
Shepherd around, who pays attention to the bald dude in glasses? In the
end, Derek's legendary status ends up hurting Derek the most. Because
when people expect greatness out of you 24/7, it's damn near impossible
to live up to. You're bound to take a big fall.

Like the interns do, I'd like you to ask yourselves -- if you were
handed a death sentence today, couple of months to live, what's the
first thing you'd do? Personally, I wouldn't waste any time. I'd
immediately re-introduce trans fats into my diet and then hop a plane to
one of those huts over the ocean in Bali where the floor is glass so you
can experience all the marine life without actually having to get wet.
But that's me. Izzie's clearly a better person. Just when she's found
her niche at SGH, teaching the interns, she gets slapped with cancer.
Wear sunscreen. But instead of hightailing it to a Balinese paradise
(seriously, those huts look COOL) she takes her devastating diagnosis
and channels it into an educational - albeit macabre - game for her
interns, who are sorely in need of some attention. Shonda's had this
Patient X thing in her head for a long, long time -- and when she first
pitched it out, I immediately loved it. And hated it. I still love and
hate it. Because it's so totally messed up and unfair. What Izzie's
doing, teaching the interns, is a selfless, meaningful endeavor that no
one else, even Alex, will ever give her credit for. Everyone's been busy
clamoring for surgeries while Izzie's quietly achieved the impossible --
she's turned the gaggle of morons we met in season 4 into doctors. And
now she's DYING. And no one gets her, and no one knows it, and it's
seriously UNFAIR. Wear sunscreen.

Except Cristina. Now A LOT of thought and discussion went into the
decision that the person Izzie goes to first should be Cristina. And
some of you were probably thinking, why not Alex? Why not George? Hell,
why not Mer? And that's what Izzie was thinking too, in the end when
she's standing in the resident lounge, eyeing all of her friends,
wondering whose evening to ruin. And she decides on Cristina. Because at
the end of the day, even though they've never gotten along that well,
Izzie knows Cristina's strong enough to take news like that. She's not
gonna crumple, she's gonna take the news like a hard, cold scientist and
that's what Izzie wants right now. It's what she needs. 'Cause she's got
a hell of a fight on her hands and the odds are stacked. I'd want
Cristina Yang on my case too.

So my Mom -- she really loves Grey's Anatomy. In fact, she calls me
after every episode, thrilled and excited to tell me what scenes she
loved, what lines made her laugh, whose performance made her
cry...Tonight I asked her what she thought and there was a long silence.
And then: HE HIT THE RING WITH THE BAT!? I know many of you are equally
as shocked, maybe a little horrified, and I'm with you. It was brutal to
watch. But here's what I really want you to take from it -- Meredith's
reaction to it all was infused with a maturity and strength that was
five seasons in the making. She didn't crumple to the ground sobbing,
she told him to do his worst, because she's not going anywhere. She
knows he's drunk and angry, she knows he's lashing out at her because
that's what you do when you're drunk and angry and filled with
self-loathing, you lash out at the last people in the world you should
be lashing out at, the people you love and most importantly, she knows
Derek doesn't mean it. She knows he's at his lowest, professionally,
personally...so she's not gonna bail on him. She's gonna let him have
his little "the world is a better place without me operating in it"
tantrum and when the dust settles, Mer's still gonna be standing there,
supporting him. Because that's what you do in a relationship. That's
what you do in a marriage. For better or for worse, right? So you can
choose to see the end of this episode as a MerDer nuclear holocaust, but
I really hope you don't. I hope you can see it as I do -- as progress.
Twisted progress, yes, but hopeful all the same. For better or for
worse, people.

And with that...let the discussion begin!

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
