[] Krista Vernoff on "No Good at Saying Sorry (One More Chance)"...

Original Airdate: 4-30-09

Hi. It's Krista. I'm saying, It's Krista because it's been a loooooong
time since you've heard from me. The last time I wrote you was the
second episode of the season, and now here we are, three to the end.
Crazy, that's what that is. It's not that I don't love you, really. It's
just that we have this staggeringly good staff now who write really,
really good TV. I love this staff because they make my life and my job
so much easier. Also, because they make me laugh really hard every
single day. It makes me happy to have a life where people are nice and
kind and funny and smart and no one is getting drunk and screaming and
throwing things at my head. My life was not always this good. Which is
why I love the episode you just saw, why I'm so, so proud of it.

What I just got to say to everyone watching was, "Advocate for the
children in your life." I didn't start out with that agenda. I started
out with the theme of Making Amends -- can't remember who pitched it,
but I loved it. It started out with an idea about Thatcher finally
getting sober and coming to make his amends. But then one of the
brilliant writers pitched this story he'd read about a kid who emptied a
gun into his Dad. And the episode started to take shape. And it turned
into an opportunity for me to say to millions of viewers, "Advocate for
the children in your life." And that makes me really, deeply happy.
Because I was a kid who could have used an advocate. And I don't wanna
get all over-sharey and uncomfortable and make you feel like you have to
avert your eyes cause you came here for some bantery writer blather and
ended up in an unshot episode of In Treatment, so that's all I'm gonna
say. I was a kid who could've used an advocate. And as an adult, I have
never understood when other adults stand idly by, looking away and
making excuses while people hurt children.

I LOVE what Richard says to Meredith. I wrote it, so, y'know, I should
love it -- but I don't always love everything I write -- and man, do I
LOVE that scene. I sat on set while the brilliant Tom Verica shot that
scene and while the luminous Ellen Pompeo and the wonderful Jim Pickens
acted it. And I cried. Every take. I just sat there crying take after
take after take. I cried for Meredith, mostly, because finally, FINALLY
one of the adults in her life is taking responsibility for what happened
to her. Finally, she's hearing the words that she needed and didn't even
know she needed. People have tried to apologize before. Thatcher has
tried. Richard has even tried. And it's not that Meredith is
hard-hearted. It's not that she can't forgive. It's just that no one
ever got it right before. She was just a baby. She was a little kid. She
couldn't stand up for herself. And here were all these adults running
around acting like children and failing, every day, to fight for her.
She was neglected and she was abused. Her mother, for those who may have
forgotten, attempted suicide IN FRONT OF HER. This was an emotionally
unstable woman, Ellis Grey. Richard saw that -- and he did nothing. And
Thatcher, her freaking FATHER, who not only saw it, he lived it WITH
HER, did less than nothing. To make an amends is not just to apologize.
It's to make a thing right. And Thatcher's little scripted apology can't
do that for Meredith. It can't make it right. Her pain runs too deep.
Her abandonment was too complete. And so when Richard finally truly
takes responsibility? It breaks down a wall in Meredith's heart that I
truly believe she didn't even know was there. I think she's as shocked
by her tears as anyone. And I think there is real and profound healing
in that moment.

Almost as much as I love what Richard says to Meredith, I love what
Meredith says to the mother of poor little Maddy, who emptied a 17
bullet clip into her abusive father. (And yes, by the way, there are 17
bullet clips. And no, 6 year old Maddy would not have been arrested and
taken away from her Mom. We called the Seattle Police and asked. ) I
know that what Meredith says and does is controversial, and I meant it
to be. I know that there are syndromes that abuse victims go through,
and that perspectives get wholly skewed. And I think Richard is
absolutely right to order Meredith to stay away from that family. And I
think Meredith is absolutely right -- and powerful and awesome -- to
ignore that order. And maybe it's just my fantasy that an over-stepping
doctor could prompt a woman that damaged to finally do the right thing
and take a stand to protect herself and her child. But if it's a
fantasy, it's one I'm proud to put on TV.

There's a lot more I could say about this episode, but I did the podcast
this week, so I'm kinda sick of hearing myself talk about it. So
instead, I'd just like to say, once more, with feeling, please advocate
for the children in your life. With love, Krista

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
