[] Krista Vernoff on "Good Mourning" and "Goodbye"...

Original Airdate: 9-24-09

Below I've pasted an email sent to me by our awesome writer's PA Raamla.
She sent it because I was storming around the office ranting about
having to write a blog and not having any ideas of what to write and
then one of the assistants, Safia, suggested I could do 25 random things
about Grey's Anatomy and the GA writers, which thrilled me -- cause I
can do that in my sleep! Like:

1. During the making of this episode, we tortured the assistants by
running a "quiz show" in the writer's room to see which one knows the
show best.

2. That paramedic you saw in 601 is played by Ray Ford -- whom you
haven't seen on our show since he was hanging upside down in an
ambulance!

3. In the writer's room at Grey's Anatomy, we are obsessed with Friday
Night Lights, Project Runway and ordering Pinkberry in the afternoon...

You get the idea. So that was my plan for this blog. Then, as I
mentioned, I got this very thoughtful email from Raamla...

...

Monday, September 21, 2009 6:06:21 PM

From:

Raamla

Hey Krista

While I really like Safia's idea about the 25 things, I think that there
are so many beautiful moments in your episodes that the fans would want
to get some insight into. As someone who used to read the writers' blog
every Friday morning during seasons 2 & 3, I found it interesting to
hear the writer's perspective on his or her episode. And also, I loved
to hear that you guys cared as much for the characters as I did!

As far as ideas, I think it would be great to talk about:

1) Meredith's using sex to deal with her grief - like she did when she
found out McDreamy was married.

2) Cristina avoiding her pain altogether - like when Meredith almost
died and she was at the bar.

3) Callie's being the first person to break down, yet accepting that
Izzie was the closest person to George.

4) The laughing funeral scene.

5) Christina and Owen finally dealing with the choking incident from
last season.

6) Derek and The Chief and the Merger - that last look of betrayal that
Derek feels by the Chief.

7) George's death - maybe going off what Owen said about him and how
brave he was and how George pushing someone out of the way of a moving
bus, was SO George. He was always acting on his impulses (confessing his
love to Meredith, speaking up about the drunk doctor, getting married to
Callie, joining the army, etc.).

Anyway, these are just some thoughts I had. Maybe this will inspire much
better ideas as you think, "These are ridiculous!!" Either way, hope
this helps! :)

Raamla

Hmmmm. I kind of love Raamla for this, cause it's all thoughtful and
smart and sweet and not at all ridiculous and then I kinda think she
sucks cause it's SO thoughtful that now I can't really justify my 25
things plan. Except, I can't stop myself...

4. Our assistants have really good names...Raamla, Safia, Seve, Miguel,
Jess, Nancy, Star and Austin. Sounds kinda like the cast of some really
great soap opera, right?

5. I have 64 extra copies of my new book "The Game On! Diet" sitting in
a corner of my office. That's a lot of extra copies. They're taking up a
lot of room.

6. Shonda just ordered really great new furniture for our bungalow. And
today, we all gave Tony Phelan crap for sitting on it while still sweaty
from working out.

7. Most of us don't read the newspaper anymore because Allan Heinberg
reads everything for us and then just tells us everything we need to
know.

8. Stacy McKee is making a baby! We call it Blueberry. Blueberry McKee.
I'm hoping that's what she actually names it.

Okay, I'll stop now. Cause really, I could finish this list happily but
again....Raamla's email is pounding in my brain like the freakin' tell
tale heart! Except instead of a heart beat, it's going, "Lazy-ass.
Lazy-ass..."

So I think the reason I don't want to spend any time writing about these
episodes is not just that I'm lazy but that it makes me sad. Watching
them made me sad, writing them made me sad and now writing about them
will make me sad because, as Cristina finally acknowledges 40 days after
the event, "George O'Malley died."

It's heartbreaking. I fell in love with George, like many of you did,
Season One. The first episode of Grey's Anatomy that I got to write was
the one where George is kind to Annie, the lady with the 60 lb tumor. In
an attempt to comfort her about her procrastination in seeing a doctor,
George talks to her about his love for Meredith and how he has yet to
confess it. And Annie says something like, "Seriously? You're equating
your love life with my record-breaking tumor?? Seriously??" I loved
George because he was doing that; because his love for Meredith was as
big as that tumor; because, like Izzie, George led with his heart. Like
Raamla said, he was impulsive, big-hearted, and yeah, it's that heart
that had him jump in front of a moving bus to save a life. It's a
devastating end to a beloved character, but I would argue with anyone
who said it wasn't a fitting end. He was brave and noble, like Owen
said. He was a sweet, beautiful boy, just becoming a man. Sucks. Sad.
Crappy. So crappy. Ugh, I've had enough of sad, seriously.

9. We call Mark Wilding "The Hammer." As in, "Hey, Hammer, what do you
want for lunch?" I feel his credit should read Executive Producer: Mark
The Hammer Wilding.

10. One of our writers, Bill Harper, once did a puppet show for the
writer's room with home made Balinese shadow puppets.

11. One of our other writers, Debora Cahn, works from New York.

12. Kevin McKidd plays a mean guitar.

"Lazy-ass...Lazy-ass..."

Fine.

What else...?

I think I'll just work my way up the rest of Raamla's list, which brings
us to...

Derek and The Chief and the Merger - that last look of betrayal that
Derek feels by the Chief.

Yeah -- this is a thing that won't be going away any time soon. Derek
was pretty freakin' noble. So noble! Cause you KNOW how much he wants
that job. It was the promise of the Chiefdom that brought him to Seattle
from NYC to begin with. Okay, that and his love for ferry boats. Oh, and
the Mark/Addison messiness but y'know, mostly, it was the promise of
becoming Chief. And right here, the job was his for the taking. And out
of loyalty and friendship, he went to the Chief and warned him. So what
is up with the Chief that in response, he completely shut Derek out?
Pride. He's all proud and hurt and threatened. Really, really
threatened. And people are flawed. Even the Chief, whom I adore, is
deeply flawed. And the phrase, "No good deed goes unpunished," was
coined for a reason. I don't subscribe to it. I do good deeds anyway.
But I have had the experience of occasionally having them bite me in the
ass. So I relate to Derek on this but I also have great compassion for
the Chief, because he has sacrificed a lot for this job. He has done his
very best. And this -- even though it's actually loyalty on Derek's
part, I get that somehow it feels like a betrayal. Certainly it's
humiliating. And feeling angry with someone is often easier than feeling
indebted. Either way, like I said, don't expect the emotional fall-out
from this to go away any time soon.

Cristina and Owen finally dealing with the choking incident from last
season.

How brilliant are the actors in that scene???? Seriously -- how freakin'
good are all three of them? If I could hand some kind of award to Kevin
McKidd and Sandra Oh and Amy Madigan today, I would. Y'know what? I just
might. When I was nominated for an Emmy and didn't win, my best friends
made me an Emmy out of tinfoil. I might do something like that -- that's
how good they all are. And here's what you don't know... I handed them
that scene 20 MINUTES BEFORE CAMERAS ROLLED. Swear to God. The scene was
something totally different. It was actually a funny scene right up
until the last minute. I had been desperate to find humor anywhere I
could in these two hours and because Sandra is a pretty reliable source
for comedy, I had leaned on the funny. And I got a call from the set
after they rehearsed the scene. Sandra and Kevin had smart questions --
and what became crystal clear to me instantly is that this storyline
could not be resolved in a humorous way. It had earned weight. Indeed,
it required weight. I knew what the scene had to be and I frantically
wrote it and ran it over to the set and Kevin smiles and goes, "Great. I
better go memorize this." Sandra thanked me, Amy thanked me. Huge 11th
hour rewrite and no one flinched. And then I saw the dailies... When I
say I handed them a completely rewritten scene 20 minutes before cameras
rolled I am not exaggerating. 20 minutes. So I was stunned by the
dailies. The work is so beautiful, I would've been stunned by what they
delivered regardless of when they got the scene -- but in this case, I
was double extra stunned. Tin foil emmys all around, I say. Or, y'know,
real Emmys. Just sayin'.

As for the storyline, I feel like this is just the beginning for Owen
and Cristina. It's a really interesting beginning because it's sort of
like, okay, we're dealing with the PTSD, with all the damage. And the
damage has, strangely, been a lot of the driving force in the coming
together of these two very different people. So now...if the damage is
being treated...if the damage is not the focus...what is? Who will they
be together? I, for one, am really excited to find out.

The laughing funeral scene.

I have to admit that this is one of my very favorite scenes ever. That's
a dangerous thing to say because I wrote it and it may sound braggy so I
need to point out that television is a collaborative art. I may have
written the words on the page, but in the writer's room, the writers all
pitched on it and our assistant Austin took a lot of good notes to help
me remember things (cause being the mother of a two and half year old,
my brain is like swiss cheese,) and after the table read, Shonda gave me
smart notes that enhanced the writing and then the wonderful director Ed
Ornelas and the amazing DP Herb Davis and the whole crew that support
them made it visually beautiful and then the actors... damn, did they
all bring their A game to this scene. And then there are the editors and
music folks and the people who color correct everything and mix the
sound... It's a collaboration. What it takes to make good TV is a huge
coming together of a great many artists. What it takes to make great TV
is all that plus a little magic and a little luck. And that's what I
feel like we had with this scene. It's so funny and so bittersweet and
so, so sad. Because despite the fact that they are laughing at a wholly
inappropriate time (remember in Season 2 when Mer had her hand on a bomb
and Izzie was laughing and she admitted that she laughs at funerals?)
they all seem so grown up. They came together fresh-faced kids and now
one of them has cancer and one of them is dead and damn, life is
freakin' like that, y'know? Growing up is crazy hard. Friends get sick
and friends die and marriages begin and end. It's so complicated and so
beautiful and so painful and the best any of us can hope for, I think,
is to have friends who will stick by us and laugh with us and cry with
us and just be with us through it all.

As a side note -- who noticed the creative staging designed to disguise
the fact that Ellen was very, very pregnant when we shot this scene?
She's standing with her back to us in the beginning, and then when we
face her, we only see her beautiful, glowing face. Veeeery clever, Ed.

Callie's being the first person to break down, yet accepting that Izzie
was the closest person to George.

Sara was so beautiful in every frame of these episodes. She always drops
my jaw -- but when she's wailing to Mark, "...and Arizona keeps bringing
me doooooooonuts," I just loved her even more. And as for Callie, here's
the big question: If faced with having to decide what to do with your
brain-dead ex-husband's organs, would you rise above and turn to his
ex-mistress for help? ...Yeah, there's nothing like an unexpected death
by bus to help bygones be bygones. I think she does the right thing
there. And part of why I think she's able to do the right thing is that
she's healthy enough to feel all of her feelings. She IS the first one
to break down and let her tears come and she lets her tears come more
than once in the weeks following George's death. Even though she looks
like the biggest mess, she's actually the healthiest among them -- and
maybe that's because she wasn't close to George anymore when he died,
she had a little distance -- so she could feel her grief without feeling
like it might kill her. Unlike his closest friends...

Meredith's using sex to deal with her grief - like she did when she
found out McDreamy was married.

Mer using sex to avoid her feelings is not, as Raamla points out,
unchartered territory. What I love, though, is that Mer is now healthy
enough to actually TALK about the fact that that's what she's doing. I
LOVE the "cancer-pop" scene -- where Mer points out that Cristina's not
processing her grief AT ALL and is therefore on uber-Cristina mode --
wholly abrasive and insensitive and inappropriate. But Mer knows that
she herself is using sex and work to avoid her grief and that that's
working for her. Until that janitor cleans out George's locker and it
stops working for her. When Meredith finally cries for George...I cried
again for George. And I'm about to cry now just thinking about it,
so...y'know, moving on...

Cristina avoiding her pain all together - like when Meredith almost died
and she was at the bar.

Cristina, who as a young child, held her father's heart in her hands as
it stopped beating, is perhaps the least "processed" of our core group,
the least "healthy," the least able to handle the impact of George's
sudden death. Mer is using sex, Cristina is using her frustration around
her lack of sex. So when she finally gets in bed with Owen and she
finally has the tension release that comes with that kind of, um...
tension release... She can't hold the truth off anymore.

That's the thing about the five stages of grief. They truly are
different for everyone. Cristina clung to the Denial stage for 40 days.
And then she let in the fact that George died. And as much as Mer's
tears got to me, that intake of breath from Cristina got to me even
more. The sudden realization that George really did...die.

I still do that sometimes. Sometimes I'll be driving in my car and I'll
see a poster for a movie that's about to come out and I'll think, "Oh, I
should totally see that with Dad." And then I remember, in a split
second, that he's gone. That he died 8 and a half years ago now. Grief
is funny thing. It comes and goes. Except, in my experience, it never
really goes...

There's more to say about these 2 hours for sure. Mark and Lexie are
pure joy for me in these two hours and I don't mean to skip over them
because Mark saying "Was he hung?" is maybe my favorite thing ever. And
there's Arizona and how much she cares and her awesome diagnosis and the
exquisite Martha Plimpton who fights so hard, the way we all should, for
her son. And there's the beautiful, beautiful Bailey and her pain around
the loss of George and the fact that Derek stops the elevator for her
just like she stopped it for him so long ago after he had to let Bonnie
(and Meredith) go. (Did you notice Shonda used the same song there as
she did in the elevator scene in Into You like a Train? First time in
our series we've reused a song.) Also Clara and Lexie and the beauty of
that journey -- of moving through the five stages of grief around the
life you once had, (which is, by the way, exactly what Clara's doing in
case you want to watch again and clock the stages ) and the moment where
she lets Lexie call her Mom which brings me to tears every time. And
there's Alex Karev and Izzie and what I consider to be one of the most
brutal moments of all time when he goes, "I miss George. Nice, real
seductive." God, does that hurt to watch. And then there's Justin's
amazing performance when he finally admits everything he's scared of.
And there's Katherine Heigl's exquisite vulnerability as she tries to
imagine a) living and b) living without George. There's so much -- and I
know I'm missing stuff. But I have to go home now and see my daughter,
who is a million times more awesome than anything you'll ever see on TV,
so I'll say bye for now. Except, I really can't help myself...

13. Writer Jenna Bans' husband writes for The Office. There is a weekly
Thursday night war in their home.

14. Shonda's birthday and Patrick Dempsey's birthday are the same day
which also happens to be the same day as my sister, Kaili.

15. Chandra Wilson and Allan Heinberg both worked as word processors at
Banker's Trust in New York at the same time!

16. Writers Tony Phelan, and Joan Rater are married to each other. And a
long time ago, they were roommates with Allan Heinberg in New York City.
Also, Tony was a theater director in New York when I was a struggling
actress there. We are pretty sure I auditioned for him and he didn't
call me back.

17. Writer Pete Nowalk co-wrote a funny book called The Hollywood
Assistants Handbook and if you want to know how to be an assistant, you
should read it.

18. Executive Producer Betsy Beers is getting married in Venice, Italy
next month and Austin Scarlett of Project Runway fame designed her gown.

19. Best-Boy Grip Tim Day is also a professional screenwriter.

20. There is a Grey's Anatomy softball team that plays the teams of
other shows including CSI. We're currently in first place.

21. Script Supervisor Nicole Rubio often plays a paramedic on our show
and was once a Raiderette.

22. When someone has a great idea in the writers' room, someone else
will shout BANG.

23. Shonda drives around the lot in a hot pink golf cart that says
SHONDA across the front. It is her pride and joy.

24. Writer/Doctor Zoanne Clack, Writer Stacy McKee, Director of Research
Meg Marinis and Chandra Wilson are all from Houston, Texas. They say
"Y'all" a lot.

25. We have used 7 guest actors who regularly appear on Friday Night
Lights.

Okay, I'm going now. Thank you for watching. Really, thanks, it means a
lot.

Love,

Krista

p.s. Thanks again, Safia and Raamla! You both rock. *(and it was Raamla
who won that contest I mentioned in fact #1)

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
