[] Joan Rater on "(I Always Feel Like) Somebody's Watchin' Me"...

Original Airdate: 10-1-09

Hi and WELCOME TO SEASON SIX! Kind of amazing if you think about it.
It's amazing to me, at least. I've never had the same job for this long.
In TV, there's a lot of hopping from show to show, a new job every year,
so the fact that Tony and I haven't hopped for awhile, we've gotten to
spend 5 years with the same characters (on screen and off), has been
such a great experience. So Yay!

We had this conference at the end of last year, all the writers, where
Shonda asked us to imagine what we wanted Season Six to look like. We
were all given the task of thinking, dreaming, imagining what we wanted
for our show, our characters. We all had to present our ideas, and
because it's Shonda, there were prizes. For originality, for best ideas,
for most interesting presentation, and because there was this sort of
formal presentation-like quality to it, it became kind of scary. But
once everyone finished complaining and procrastinating and avoiding and
stuff, people came up with some really amazing presentations. There was
a puppet show. Songs were written. There were etch-a-sketch art drawings
of operations. What I decided to do for my presentation was go be a
resident for a day. So I got a trauma surgeon at County Hospital to
agree to let me follow him around for 24 hours. Oh my God, people! I got
to go into an OR. Blood was splattered! It was awesome! Anyway, I'm
sharing this with you to tell you that Season Six is going to be
awesome. People came up with some amazing ideas. There was passion.
There was humor. There was nudity! Not really. Actually that was a rule.
Shonda said no nudity and no live animals. But we were all inspired and
stuff. Which was Shonda's point. To inspire us. And so along the lines
of inspiration... I'd like to use this blog to share with you some of
the things that inspired me during the writing of this episode. If that
sounds really boring to you, I apologize, I'll try to make it
interesting and, as a little prize for reading the blog, I will reveal a
secret about myself at the very end. Something I have never told a soul.
But you have to keep reading...

After Richard dropped the bomb that the hospital would be merging with
Mercy West, we knew that this episode would have to deal with people's
paranoia. Because merger means change. And change means fear. And the
worst kind of fear is the kind that lives in your head. The dark
thoughts. The paranoia. The worst case scenarios that you play out that
usually don't come true. And with Richard holing himself up inside his
office, it's just a breeding ground for rumor, fear and paranoia. So,
when we started talking about this episode, the theme of paranoia
emerged pretty quickly. And right away I thought of doing a medical
story about a paranoid schizophrenic. And my inspiration for the story
of Tom and Jodie came from a kid I knew growing up named Jon. I babysat
for him. His mom, Barbara and my mom are friends. We went on vacations
with their family. And he grew up and became a paranoid schizophrenic.
My mom recently told me a story that when Jon (who's now 30) needs a
haircut, Barbara is unavailable all day for golf or bridge because she
never knows how long it will take for Jon to find a barber shop he's
okay with. She has to drive from barbershop to barbershop, waiting for
him to get a 'good feeling' about one. It might happen right away, it
might take all day. And she's patient and kind and she just does it
because she's his mother. I was really moved when my mom told me this
story because I know these people and I know how painful this has been
for her but how she just handles it, with dignity and humor. I can just
picture the scene in the car as she pulls up to yet another one, "Well,
Jon?" I can totally see her trying to talk him into giving one a try.
And I can see him wanting to do it, to please her, but ultimately being
too afraid and telling her they have to try another one. I can just
picture the front seat of that car, so full of love and disappointment
and fear as they negotiate this very mundane thing that for them has
become anything but mundane. Then the story became what it became, with
Tom choking Lexie, and falling down the stairs creating a real dilemma
for Jodie. And the idea of Bailey pricking her finger to show Tom that
she's human, she's a mother and she's a doctor and she's human, that
idea came from Krista, but the original inspiration was the complicated
love that I've witnessed between these family friends.

So we knew what our main medical story was going to be and we decided
that we wanted everyone in the hospital, the doctors, nurses, techs,
everyone, to be scared. Scared to leave the hospital, scared to give up
any edge. Just scared. No one is safe and that kind of infection running
through the hospital is easy to relate to. In the Writer's Room there
are a few of us who operate in a perpetual state of paranoia, so on the
one hand it was easy to write that stuff and fun to tell funny stories
about our crazy thoughts. But here's the thing about crazy thoughts -
sometimes they aren't crazy. Case in point -- here is an email I wrote
to the writers in July telling them about a crazy, paranoid night I
spent worrying about my cat -

" Last night I woke up at 4 am and remembered that at about 2 am I had
heard some weird cat meowing, like a cat dying, and I suddenly realized
that our cat was dead. I knew, just KNEW that the sound I heard was Fern
being killed by a coyote. Now, Fern spends every night outside and then
at EXACTLY 5 am she appears at the porch door outside our bedroom and
meows to be let in. But last night I knew that Fern would not appear on
schedule because I just knew she was dead. Oh, because not only had I
heard the weird cat meowing at 2, but there had also been some weird dog
barking at about 10 pm that in my 4 am head meant a coyote had been
stalking the neighborhood earlier and had settled on my house to wait
patiently outside of until the perfect opportunity to kill my cat arose.
At 4 am this is what I knew had happened FOR SURE. So what did I do? I
woke Tony and told him the cat was dead. I went downstairs and began
googling how to help your children deal with a dead pet advice. I
googled the sound that a cat being killed by a coyote makes. I
considered not telling Sally and hoping she'd never notice, I prayed, I
went outside (at 4 am!) and looked for (blood?) evidence, I thought
about what a perfect cat she had been. I blamed myself for not being
more vigilant about keeping the cat in at night. I let myself off the
hook because I, told myself, Fern loved being outside at night and who
was I to deny her her animal urges, I decided that I would tell my kids
some version of "Fern lived a great life, a cat life, and as part of a
cat's life there is danger, the circle of life, etc", I decided I'd tell
the kids Fern got cancer and we put her to sleep, I decided we'd never
get another cat. I decided we'd get 2 kittens right away. I decided to
get another dog. And then at 5 am, on the dot ... Fern came to the door
outside our bedroom and meowed to be let in."

We laughed about my craziness in the writer's room the next day and then
guess what happened a MONTH later?!!! The cat disappeared. For good. I
don't mean to make everyone all sad with the story of my dead cat, I'm
just saying, sometimes you are just being paranoid and sometimes you
aren't, so what are you supposed to do? Be like Lexie and live you life
in that kind of heightened fearful state? No, you have to keep going,
walk the dog, eat dinner, live ... you have to find a way to stop living
in fear ... Especially if you're a surgeon ... you need to be able to
put your fear aside ...

Which is why I loved the scene where Owen, Derek and Mark take Cristina,
Meredith and Lexie to the baseball field. This is one of the first times
Owen has seen Cristina's intensity. And I love that he makes her leave
the hospital, focus on something else. That's why he's so good for her.
The scene was actually inspired by Shonda saying, let's do a scene where
they're all playing baseball. But when I finally saw it, it makes me
want to write more scenes like that, with our doctors outside of the
hospital, little glimpses of them in real life. One of my favorite
Grey's moments of all time was this Season One scene where Meredith and
Cristina are outside jogging and they stop and they're laying in the
grass and they decide they need to cry. And they're like, "Now? Should
we cry right now?" Or something like that. Anyway, I love those little
glimpses of our people as "real" people.

Back to the inspiration ... Izzie's story was very much inspired by my
friend Lynn, who has cancer and runs her own company. A big concern for
her while she gets treated is making sure her employees have confidence
in her and don't see her as sick or weak. She told me that that went
into her decision to get a really good wig which looks just like her
hair did before chemo. It's to put her clients and employees at ease. We
live in Los Angeles and it gets really hot here and Lynn has said there
are some days where she just looks at that wig and it's the last thing
she wants to put on, but she does. And, like Izzie, who used this as an
opportunity to 'try being a redhead", Lynn also got a spikey short
'weekend' wig to try out a more fun hairstyle. Although, at home on the
weekend, she usually goes wigless, her daughter prefers it and says she
likes the peachfuzz.

I love that scene where Alex brings Izzie her 2 pm pill and a banana and
water. She doesn't want Alex to hover but he can't help it, he loves her
and that's what you do for someone you love, especially when they're
trying to pretend they're fine. And I love it when he tells her at the
end that she can't pretend she isn't sick, that she needs to take
responsibility for her illness and he can't be her nurse. One thing
we've talked about in the Writer's Room a lot is the fact that we have
these two married couples right now -- Izzie and Alex, and Meredith and
Derek, who had very different weddings, for very different reasons and
we really want to explore what the idea of commitment means for them
this season.

When we were writing the episode we realized that it didn't seem right
that Meredith would be paranoid, which is when we came up with the idea
that because of her chaotic childhood, she gets calm in a crisis. It's
when she's at her best. It's what makes her a great doctor, makes her
the glue that holds all her friends together, and it's what Derek needs
right now because whatever it is that's going on with him and the Chief
looks like it's going to get worse before it gets better ...

And finally ... the inspiration for the funny Cristina stuff with the
kids came from my daughter, Sally. Every night when I get home she hides
and I have to find her. But whenever I get close, she yells out orders
from her hiding place, "You haven't looked in the kitchen", "try
upstairs", and then when I finally find her, she gets upset. She HATES
being found! And therefore I HATE HIDE AND SEEK.

Look at that, big things are happening people, secrets are being
revealed this season, even in blogs! I'm telling you, Season Six is
going to be good!

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
