[] Jenna Bans on "Tainted Obligation"...

Original Airdate: 10-8-09

So I'm a large nerd. I like my parents. A lot. I like to hang out with
them, I talk to them almost every day on the phone. I was the person in
high school who was like, nah, I don't think I'm going to that party,
I'll probably just chill with the ole' parental unit. We'll order a
pizza, play a few board games -- it's gonna be a blast if you want to
stop by...yep, I was that girl. (I know you're wondering and yes,
shockingly, I still had a few friends my own age.) Even now, I get a
three day weekend and I'm usually off to Minneapolis to hang with the
parents. Now I recognize that that's super weird and slightly creepy to
most people, including my husband. He's all, ew nerd, stop being so
obsessed with your parents. But I am. I just like 'em. They're good
peeps. And they gave me a very happy and stable childhood -- which I
took for granted until I moved to Los Angeles and started working in
television -- because amongst creative types, I'm figuring out the
normal upbringing is quite the rarity.

My point being, it was REALLY easy for me to understand Lexie in this
episode -- 'cause that's how I imagine she grew up with Susan and
Thatcher. There was taco night, and movie night, and if she had homework
issues, one of them was always around to help. So now that her Dad needs
some of her liver, recovering alcoholic or not, she's gonna do it. She's
not even thinking about the Chief's upcoming merger -- and the fact that
recovering from a major surgery will put her on the bench, out of the
game, for at least a month. Lexie doesn't blink, because family isn't an
obligation to her like it is for a lot of people - it's a gift. But
Meredith, as we all know, did not have such a charmed childhood. So you
can hardly blame her for shutting down emotionally the second Thatcher
shows up and pukes blood on her shoes. Hell, anyone would draw the line
at puking on the shoes, right? (Hey, fun fact -- that wasn't Ellen
Pompeo's feet, that was her stand-in's feet that got thrown up on 'cause
Ellen was all pregnant and we got her off her feet whenever it was
possible.)

What's interesting about this storyline was that I thought I wrote a
reconciliation story -- between Mer and her father. I thought I wrote
the episode that was going to put all the bad blood behind them for
good. And it did, in a way -- Mer tells Thatcher the door is open, which
is pretty huge. And though it was incredibly hard for her to work up the
courage to say that to him, she knew it was the only thing that would
let him -- or alleviate his guilt enough - to allow her to save his
life. But something happened in this story during the shooting process.
It changed -- subtly, but substantially. Here's how it started -- Ellen
Pompeo came to me on the first day of shooting and wanting to change
that speech she gives to Thatcher. She wanted to add a simple line, to
have Mer say "I want you to do this for her." Because for Ellen, this
story wasn't a Mer/Thatcher reconciliation story -- it was a Mer/Lexie
story. It was a story about these two women, who have done this awkward
dance around each other for two seasons now, finally becoming sisters.
Ellen insisted that her main reason for doing what she does, for being
completely vulnerable in front of the man who has hurt her in more ways
than we can count at this point, was Lexie. She was doing it for Lexie.
And the more I thought about that, the more I became convinced she was
absolutely right. And when that became clear to me, everything sort of
fell into place. That last scene when Derek's watching Mer wake up,
Lexie at her side, having slept with her all night, was even more
emotional. It wasn't just about Lexie being grateful -- that was there
for sure -- but now it was about Lexie unconditionally loving her
sister. And Mer actually loving her back. Now I don't think they'll be
having slumber parties and pillow fights with each other any time soon,
but still. From strangers two seasons ago to actual sisters is pretty
amazing progress -- especially for someone who's ambivalent to the very
idea of family ala Meredith Grey.

And though it seemed that Derek had a small part in Meredith's story
tonight, what he did for her was as important as if he had talked her
face off for six scenes -- he let her have space. It's funny, 'cause in
the writers' room he DID have six scenes of talking her face off -- he
was originally going to point out all the pros and cons of donating the
liver, he was going to be sort of a sounding board for her as she worked
it out. But then we came to something better, the idea of visually
showing Mer struggle while Derek watches, knowing he can't help her with
this. Knowing to stop Cristina from going to her because she can't help
Mer either. He knows his wife well enough to realize this was a huge,
huge decision that she had to come to herself -- and simply waited,
ready to support her, whatever she should decide.

So get this -- the story that was probably most emotional for me to
write? Irving gets a new penis. And not because standards & practices
gave me hell about it. (Which they did - in the most gentle, polite way
possible. In fact, if you read the emails that went from ABC to our prop
master, Angela, to me and Shonda Rhimes, you would laugh very heartily.
Because there was waaaay too much discussion about the penis. The number
of times we used the word, the ways we used the word, the actual shape
of the apparatus... It was a very fun and incredibly absurd process to
witness.) I loved this story because I hate the idea that once you're
old, your life is over. I hate when people treat their aging parents
like old furniture they want to get rid of but have to find a place for
so they stick 'em in the corner and forget about them. I suppose because
watching their parents age is too painful, so they just...put them away.
But the thing is, the truth is, the truth that actually inspired a lot
of the writing, is something my Grandma always said. She used to say
that even though she was eighty, with horrible arthritis, she still
looked in the mirror every morning and didn't recognize herself. 'Cause
inside, she still felt the same way she did when she was twenty. That's
what I thought about while writing Irving-- this guy just has no idea
where all the time went. And what I loved about the actors who played
this story is that they made it so real -- the son and daughter-in-law
weren't evil, just overly concerned about their Dad. (Okay, maybe just a
bit condescending too...) And the amazing Ralph Waite (did anyone
recognize him as Pa Walton from 'The Waltons?') played Irving so
truthfully, without leaning too heavily on the comedy, he made us
believe he NEEDED this surgery. That it was truly the key to enjoying
his golden years -- that it would give him his "tomorrow." And how great
was Eric Dane defending Irving's right to a sex life? I wanted to cheer
when he finally told the son and daughter-in-law what was what.

Cristina, on the other hand, didn't have so much fun with Irving's
penis. (I believe that was mention #3, Standards & Practices.) Poor
Cristina. She's really struggling and lost these days. Without a cardio
god to mentor her, she's adrift. So much so that she turns a simple tick
removal into a major surgery. So much so that she says to the Chief, who
has had a helluva crappy day himself-- cut me from the program. It's
clear at this point Cristina's willing to do just about anything to get
her surgical groove back. And I can promise you, it's going to be an
interesting journey this season to see just how far she will go.

And Izzie. Poor Izzie. The girl's living with cancer, lost her best
friend, impulsively got married and dragged her husband away to live in
the woods. That takes a lot out of a person. I need to seriously recover
on the couch for an hour after I go to the grocery store -- I can't
imagine the emotional and physical fatigue Izzie must be feeling right
now. I think by the end of this episode, after Owen tells her that
channeling her experience as a patient at Seattle Grace is undermining
her strength as a doctor at Seattle Grace -- she's wondering if she made
a mistake. She's wondering if Alex and Derek and now Owen might be right
-- that she came back to work too soon. That she's not emotionally ready
to be cutting into people yet. Because I think every doctor wants to
believe all their terminal patients can be Izzie -- but the odds tell
another story. And I would imagine there's a very careful dance doctors
have to do between acting like a scientist and acting like a patient
advocate and what Owen says to her at the end sticks with her -- now
that she's been through this transformative experience -- cancer - she
has to decide who she's going to be at the hospital. She's going to have
to re-invent herself as a surgeon.

Lots of good stuff coming your way in season six, lots of BIG stuff. It
might be my favorite season so far -- although I tend to say that a lot,
about every episode, and no one in the writers' room believes me
anymore. So I'll just leave you with this little nugget. When you're
shooting an episode of television, there's this thing called the "call
sheet." It's basically a notice sent to all cast and crew, telling them
what time to be on set the next morning, the order scenes will be shot
in, make-up and hair requirements for characters, special effects
needed, things like that. It's a handy little document. And this is what
our call sheet said the night before we shot the opening scene with
Alex: DUE TO THE PRESENCE OF A BEAR ON SET, BREAKFAST WILL NOT BE
SERVED. PLEASE EAT BREAKFAST BEFORE YOU ARRIVE AND DO NOT BRING ANY FOOD
ITEMS ONTO THE SET. I read that, laughed for about ten minutes straight
at the absurdity, then got kind of scared for the crew and Justin
Chambers (it's a supposedly trained "Hollywood" bear but you can't have
a granola bar around in case it goes all "me bear, me hungry" and eats
you?) And then it suddenly hit me -- how is this my work? How is it work
to go to the woods and watch a huge grizzly bear scare the crap out of
Alex Karev? How is it my work to read funny emails about the overuse of
the word penis? (#4.) I came to the conclusion that I don't say it
nearly enough - I love my job. I love the people I work with. I loved
every minute of writing and shooting this episode. And I love all of you
for being such loyal, amazing fans of the show. I hope you loved
watching it. Or at least liked it. Or at least laughed once or twice
while checking email and paying bills.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
