[] Mark Wilding on 'Invasion'...

Original Airdate: 10-15-09

I'm sure most of you have been fired at some point in your life. I have.
In fact, I've been fired at several points. Mostly from TV shows. Mostly
for a job poorly done. I've been fired over the phone, in person, just
before major holidays, a few months after I bought my first house --
I've been fired a bunch. The people who fired me all had the usual
litany of predictable reasons for letting me go. Budget considerations,
you don't write the voice of the show, we're going a different
direction. Every tortured explanation designed to make you feel better
about yourself. And every one pretty much a lie. Because when they fire
you the truth is they just don't want you. After it's done, after the
axe has fallen, there's a predictable process to the whole thing that's
pretty much time-honored. At least in Hollywood. First, you make sure
the surviving writers don't see you (it would be like Death coming to
call). Second, you immediately go home to your wife or girlfriend or dog
and get their sympathy. Third, you say the show was never for you
anyway. And fourth, you return on the weekend to gather your things. It
works that way for everyone. Executives, writers, actors, directors,
assistants -- if you work in Hollywood you will get fired and go through
that humiliating scenario as sure as the sun comes up in the morning.

My favorite firing (at least of me) took place many years ago on a set
made to look like Central Park. It was the one they used on "Seinfeld".
I wasn't on "Seinfeld" at the time. I was on a different show but I had
a view of the park. A very good view. A good enough view where I could
witness several of the writers of the show I was on being escorted to a
little wooden bench in the fake park and told their services were no
longer needed.

I watched this grim scenario unfold over a couple of days from my office
in the bungalow on the show where I thought I was still employed (the
show shall go nameless, as shall the name of the person who fired me ---
good news though, that person was fired from a show recently and it made
my heart sing with joy). A week passed and I believed I'd escaped being
fired and so thought nothing of it when I sat on that same wooden bench
to have a sandwich one day. Halfway through my sandwich I looked up to
find my boss standing over me and telling me that I didn't seem very
happy on the show. I took a bite of sandwich and then replied that, no,
indeed, I was happy on the show. And he said no, I don't think you are
happy. And THAT'S when I realized -- in that very moment -- that I WAS
SITTING ON THE FIRING BENCH and that maybe he wasn't out there to have
lunch with me. And I was fired. All of which brings me to the toughest
firing we've probably ever seen at Seattle Grace. That of Izzie
Stevens...

Yup, Izzie is gone. Fired by the Chief who, these days, is looking for
the slightest excuse to fire ANYONE. Maybe she went back home. Or to
visit friends. Or just took off for points unknown. But yes, people,
Izzie Stevens, third year resident and surgical rising star, no longer
works at Seattle Grace/Mercy West. The hospital, new name and all, is in
her rear view mirror. George's death, her stage four cancer, coming back
to work too soon -- it all proved too much -- and now she's headed off
to God knows where. And it was heartbreaking to see her get fired, to
see her plead for her job but firings are pretty much always horrible.
And I wanted the scene to convey that sudden sense of loss, of
hopelessness, and with the help of Katie Heigl's fantastic acting, I
think it did. But more on Izzie and the broken-hearted Alex later.

The theme of the episode was "Invasion". It seemed appropriate. New
doctors were coming over from Mercy West. Callie's Dad was paying an
unwelcome visit to the hospital with the family priest in tow. Billy the
Burglar got beat up after he broke in to or "invaded" a golfer's house.
And Arizona based her whole speech on the Japanese bombing Pearl Harbor
-- which was also an invasion of sorts. All sorts of folks were coming
from the outside and invading our people's space. The first time we see
Jackson Avery, he's jogging towards the hospital, almost running into
Cristina. And then the next thing you know he's leaning across Alex in
the elevator to choose his floor. Annoying! Invasive! Just plain...rude!
And from her sick bed, where she's recovering from her liver donation to
Thatcher the previous week, an undaunted Meredith has taken charge.
"This is our ship!" The question is, are our people up for the fight?
Well first, let's talk about those new residents, the doctors they're
going up against...

Reed, Charles, April and Jackson. The Mercy West crowd. Who are just as
insecure and uncertain about their new situation as our people. And our
residents are understandably nervous because, like any invader, these MW
guys are a threat. They're smart, they fight dirty if they have to and,
like our residents, they're not going down without a fight. Of course,
our people don't know that at the beginning of the episode. But they
sure do by the end. They've been in a helluva dog fight. When we see
Mercy West's orange-clad foursome at the end of the episode, surveying
their surgical domain from the exact same place where our people were at
the beginning of the episode, we know that they're here to stay. They're
just as determined to make this their new home as our people were when
they first came to the hospital.

The new actors -- their real names are Nora, Robert, Jesse and Sarah --
were a blast to work with. I probably should have known all their
credits and what shows they've been on before we started shooting but I
didn't. And none of that mattered because they were all so strong. And
then when I saw them on screen, they looked great and were wonderfully
believable as real doctors. Which was a great relief and should make for
a fun rest of the season. So, let's talk about the pairings.

Lexie and April. We got to see a new side of Lexie. One who could fight
dirty and be a mean girl if she had to be. That is until the
passive-aggressive April herself is undone when she finds out Lexie has
read her notebook with all her little self-help homilies. That's when
Lexie softened. Which is what you do when you've trumped someone that
badly. When you've kicked their obnoxious ass all over the place. After
all, you can only be so gleeful in victory. When Lexie sees April tear
up outside the scrub room, it makes her realize that even though April's
been pretty obnoxious throughout, maybe we're not who we are in our
worst moments. Maybe we're, hopefully, something better.

Charles and Izzie. Izzie thinks that she's found someone who maybe just
maybe, reminds her a little of George. Certainly not a complete George
replacement but someone who's as charming and self-deprecating. And
might someday be a good friend. And it goes to Izzie's trusting
instincts and her need to fill the void left by George that she quickly
gloms onto a sympathetic soul like Charles. But, as the Chief tells her
later, it's a different era. The old rules don't apply -- be it with
friendships or with jobs. A lesson that Izzie learns not just once in
this episode, but twice. First when Charles brags about her being his
surgical bitch and, second, when she makes that terrible medical
mistake.

Jackson and Cristina. I liked them going toe to toe and especially loved
Cristina finally deciding to hold up the white flag of surrender.
Throwing in the surgical towel. We've been hinting in the previous
episodes that without a Cardio God, she just doesn't have her heart in
it anymore. And as for Sandra Oh -- in the scene when she's crying with
Meredith (and pining for Burke), well, my God, she was superb.

Alex and Reed. As Izzie says in the residents lounge at the start of the
episode, Reed is not a big person. Still, as Alex finds out, she can
flat out play this game. As much as I loved their competitive dynamic,
each trying to outmaneuver the other one, I also liked showing our
doctors as less than compassionate with their patient. I've visited a
number of hospitals in the last few years and I've invariably found that
our make-believe doctors generally pay much more attention to their
patients than the real-life ones. It IS a struggle to have your voice
heard in hospitals, to not be ignored. Sometimes they treat you less
like a patient and more like, well, an invader. Of course, I might be
holding them to a higher standard because my only reference point is a
pretend hospital.

Now, back to Izzie and the Chief and Alex. When you tell the Chief of
Surgery that you NEED this job, that you've got nothing else in your
life, DESPITE the fact you're married, you are in a very, very bad state
indeed. I understand the part about sneaking off without telling anyone
after you've been fired (see above) but to just leave your husband a
note -- that's brutal. No wonder Alex has issues. Every time he puts
himself out there, gets close to someone (remember Ava?) the poor guy
gets knocked back on his heels.

By the way, in the firing scene, that beautiful shot when we come around
Izzie to see all the emotions playing on her face was designed by the
show's director, Tony Phelan. His idea was to really get inside her
emotionally at that moment. Tony had a lot of other great ideas for the
episode. Ideas I would never have thought of because I'm not a director
and Tony is. (I mostly just sat there and said "Good idea, Tony. Hey,
they're making omelettes. You want me to get you an omelette, Tony? You
sure? Because they're really good omelettes. I've already had two but
they're so good I may have a third. Are you sure you don't want one,
Tony?). Tony's also one of the writers on our show. He is
multi-talented. I am not. Still, everything you see in this blog was my
idea. NOT Tony's. If he does have ideas about it, frankly, he can keep
them to himself. Give him all the credit you want for the episode, but
this blog, my blog, is where I draw the line.

Finally, I want to talk about Callie and Arizona. Shonda came up with
the idea of Mr. Torres showing up with the family priest. I immediately
said YES because anytime I can see Hector Alizondo on my TV screen, I'm
all for it. In the scene where he's quoting the Bible at Callie, he
really is afraid he's going to lose her. He's desperate, yanking out
those index cards like her very life depends on it. It was Hector's idea
to use the cards. He didn't think his character would know that stuff of
the top of his head, which is how I originally wrote it. And he was
right. And it worked beautifully. And that final scene when he and
Callie are outside the hospital and he's asking her if she'll still get
married, still have kids... I really, really liked that scene. And I
really, really liked their whole story. All told, I thought the episode
came out pretty well. At least well enough for me not to worry about
having to clean out my desk for another couple of weekends...

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
