[] Stacy McKee on "Invest in Love"...

Original Airdate: 11-5-09

OK. So I am currently writing this blog (and when I say writing, I mean
longhand. In a notebook. With a pen. That's right, people. This week I'm
blogging old school!) early on a Saturday morning as I stand in line at
a horse racing park near the Los Angeles Airport. I, along with easily
500 other people, am waiting in line to get my H1N1 vaccine.

So far, I've been in line for 35 minutes.

This is one of the only places in the city offering the vaccine right
now and while, ordinarily, I totally wouldn't bother getting up early on
my Saturday to go stand in a ridiculously long line for a shot... At
this particular moment, I really don't have a choice.

My OB was pretty darn insistent. As was Shonda, who called me out of the
writers' room on Friday to try and convince me to leave work and go
home, suggesting I should seriously consider spending the next several
weeks safely sanitized inside a large plastic bubble. (Greys and Private
have already had 3 confirmed H1N1 cases emerge in just the last week, so
the likelihood of me being exposed is... well... not absurd.)

So everyone's freaking out. And insisting I go get vaccinated. And all
of this just because --I'm pregnant. You wouldn't think that being
pregnant could cause such a fuss.

Guess what? It can.

And you probably would think that being pregnant -- newly pregnant, mind
you, and ridiculously hormonal -- might prevent me from getting assigned
to write the all PEDS episode this season. Seems a little cruel, doesn't
it? To ask the newly pregnant girl to tackle the one episode in which
every major patient is supposed to be a SICK KID?

We've been planning an all PEDS episode for some time. Arizona is a
regular now and we've started seeing more and more of her -- but for the
most part, we always see her helping Callie through crisis after crisis.
We haven't yet really given Arizona a crisis of her own. So what better
chance than in an episode where every patient is -- in essence -- her
patient. Every patient is from the PEDS floor. PEDS, where things work a
little bit differently, where the patients believe in magic. Because
they are kids. Sick, dying KIDS.

Guess what? As concerned as Shonda was about me living in a plastic
bubble, she was just as equally NOT concerned that perhaps making me
write the all Pediatrics episode was just a teeny, tiny little bit of
torture. "It'll be great," she said. "Use your new maternal instincts to
make the episode better," she said. "NO, WALLACE CAN'T LIVE! I DON'T
CARE HOW PREGNANT YOU ARE. THE ADORABLE LITTLE SICK KID MUST DIE!" she
said.

Okay, maybe she didn't say that last bit exactly like that. But still.
Even I knew I couldn't really tell Wallace's story properly if I let him
live. And as sad as it might have made you to watch his mom come into
the morgue and try to usher his final resting bad dreams away - I'm
telling you people - it was even more terrible and heartbreaking and so
so so sad for me. 'Cause all I could think of the entire time -- as I
wrote it, as I sat on set and watched us film it, as I sobbed all the
way through it while watching a cut of the episode in my office -- all I
could think about was: Oh my god, what if that were MY baby. What if I
were that mom? What if I were the one visiting my child in the morgue?

And then I would officially declare to anyone who would listen that I
was a terrible person. A terrible, terrible person to write such a
horribly sad story about a dying child -- WHILE PREGNANT.

You know how, when Alex is standing there all shirtless and Derek is
mocking him, Alex blurts out: "Bailey made me!" -- Well, that's how I
feel about this episode. Shonda made me!

I still can't get through a cut without crying. Stupid me for killing
stupid Wallace when I'm this stupidly hormonal.

It's a good thing you aren't here in line with me, cause I'm actually
starting to cry right now, just thinking about it. And I'm pretty sure
my crying is starting to make the volunteer line monitor in the red vest
a little anxious. She keeps looking at me and whispering to the red
vested guy next to her.

Btw, I've hit the hour and 10 minute mark now. And the line hasn't moved
since I started writing this.

So, to balance out all the sadness in the episode, I knew I had to
incorporate a story that would make me (and you) feel good, too. Enter
Alex. Saving a teeny tiny baby. In the NICU. Shirtless.

See? A happy miracle baby story! And a half naked handsome man! I'm not
such a terrible person!

Alex's story came from these cases I'd been reading about tiny, preemie
babies where the doctors had done everything medically possible, but the
babies just weren't strong enough to rally. So, a lot of times, the
parents would just pick up their little babies, thinking that at least
they would get to hold their child for a few minutes while it was still
alive.

And then these miracles would happen, where the babies would feel their
parents' warmth and hear their heart beat, and the babies would,
miraculously, start to thrive. One of the articles described how no
incubator could mimic the simple act, the simple comfort of the baby
being held.

Which was why this story was so perfect for Alex. He feels so completely
helpless right now, so utterly useless and alone. And then he encounters
this little baby who's also struggling, also alone. For a moment, Alex
finds a purpose. And he's reminded that he can make a difference in
somebody's life, even when his own seems to be falling apart all around
him. On the most basic level, these two little lost souls just need each
other.

Ooo! Just moved up in line. Several whole inches. This is progress,
people.

The surprise party, by the way, is based on a true story, too. A true
Grey's story. It happened a few years ago, when we threw Krista Vernoff
a surprise baby shower. It was the best kept secret our office has EVER
had (because, basically, no one in our office can keep a secret. We're a
bunch of blabber mouths. The fact that the party was genuinely a
surprise still surprises ME!) -- Anyway. Shonda told Krista to come to a
meeting at her house one morning, a morning where Krista was in the
middle of a million different rewrites and script pages and stress. Lots
of stress. So Krista kept calling people from the office, and none of us
would pick up our phones because -- of course -- we were all crouched in
Shonda's living room, waiting for Krista to arrive. So by the time she
got to Shonda's, Krista had probably had one of the worst mornings ever,
just in time to walk in the front door, have us all yell SURPRISE, and
to have poor Krista burst into tears. Full on, pregnant and hormonal
tears.

Obviously, right now, I can identify.

And that is exactly what happens to Arizona. She steps into the
apartment wanting nothing more than some quiet time to just decompress
and maybe vent a little and just feel her feelings and instead -- she's
met with a room full of party goers.

Mark Sloan is right when he says that surprise parties are hostile.
Because they ARE! (One of my favorite unscripted moments in the episode
comes from Cristina when she's eating breakfast and listening to Mark's
take on surprise parties. If you notice, she TOTALLY sides with Mark as
she chomps on her bacon. It's hilarious!)

And, if you were paying attention, you may have noticed that the
surprise party moment is the ONLY moment in the entire episode where
Arizona cries. Even though, as we've established, Arizona tends to cry
in the face of authority figures. Arizona is a people pleaser --Which is
why she winds up agreeing to a surgery she doesn't believe in -- she's
trying to please Richard. He's the chief. She doesn't want to let him
down...

But even after standing up to him, after kicking him out of her OR, she
still doesn't break down and cry. After losing Wallace, Arizona still
doesn't cry. After having to face the Chief and face Jennings in the
wake of losing Wallace, Arizona still doesn't cry.

Until the party. Where it all just comes flooding out. In the most
horribly embarrassing way.

I love, though, that then she gets it out. She cries with Callie, but
when she gets back to the hospital, even in the morgue with Wallace's
parents, Arizona doesn't break down. I feel like it's a big turning
point for her.

Meanwhile -- I've now been in line an hour and 45 minutes. This vaccine
better be worth it.

I can't, of course, blog without talking about Meredith and Derek who,
admittedly, don't have a LOT of screen time this episode. But the time
they have is, I think, utterly charming and adorable. I love seeing them
be happy and married and totally in sync with one another.

We were, of course, limited a little by the fact that when we filmed
this, Ellen had JUST had her baby. In fact, this is the first episode we
filmed with her post pregnancy. (It was really fun, actually. She had
tons of adorable baby photos to share. That is one cute baby with one
FANTASTIC wardrobe. Just saying.)

And finally -- one of my favorite moments in the entire episode comes in
the very last scene -- from Callie.

For those of you who have been watching Grey's for a while, you know
that Callie tends to blurt things like "I love you" out -- often
prematurely. She did it with George, and he never could say it back.
She's a gal who jumps in head first, sometimes blindly, and we've seen
it bite her in the ass.

So what I love love love is the moment when, after the horrible day that
Arizona's had, after the disastrous party, after losing one of her
favorite patients -- Arizona comes home, takes one look at Callie in her
lingerie and that silly party hat -- and Arizona says "I love you"
first.

The look on Callie's face when she hears that? Oh man, I'm starting to
tear up again. It's just so unbelievably vulnerable and sweet and
lovely. Okay. Totally crying again.

...Just as Red Vest is motioning for me to move ahead in line. I think
maybe I'm about to go get my H1N1 shot. FINALLY. After over 2 hours of
waiting.

At least, I suppose, I've put all the waiting to good use. I've blogged.
I've cried. And I've given myself a lot of extra work for Wednesday
night, when I'll inevitably be typing all this up. So that's it for now,
kids! Talk to you again in a few episodes!

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
