[] Krista Vernoff on "Holidaze"...

Original Airdate: 11-19-09

"Do not waste yourself in rejection; do not bark against the bad, but
chant the beauty of the good."

~ Ralph Waldo Emerson

I read that today in a friend's Facebook status update. Yes, I was
Facebook lurking as a means of procrastination just like I was tweeting
as a means of procrastination. And yes, Shonda did publicly
tweet-reprimand me, which I took with a grain of salt seeing as she had
tweeted 20 times in the prior ten minutes.

What was my point here?

Oh, the Emerson quote.

It made me pause.

It made me breathe.

For a brief moment, I was overcome with gratitude, not only for
Emerson's wise words, but for people who take the time to tweet and
facebook-post inspirational quotes that get me to pause the incessant
cycle of thoughts that spiral through my brain every day.

"Do not bark against the bad, but chant the beauty of the good."

Doesn't it make you breathe a little differently, just for a minute?
That quote is my gift to you today, just as it was a gift to me. And
seeing as the theme of tonight's episode was Gifts, it seems
appropriate. You know what the biggest gift of tonight's episode was?

Sara Ramirez singing Silent Night a capella while Chandra Wilson acts
her ass off at the dinner table. Moments like that, gifts like that...

They make me love my job even more. In my lifetime, I have never seen a
more powerful performer than Sara Ramirez when she sings live. I hope
someday you get to see her, but until then, this was a little taste. It
was Shonda's stroke of genius -- her little Christmas gift to me, I like
to think, although really, she probably intended it as a gift to all of
you. Still, I am grateful. The other gift of this scene is that I got to
write Bailey's words and put them on television. Those words were
important to me. Without getting too personal, I will admit that there
are some things going on in my life that mirror some of the things going
on in Bailey's life. If you've read this blog before, you know that we
writers frequently cull from our personal lives to come up with the
stories we tell on the show each week. (As I write this, Joan Rater is
in the writer's room, dramatically performing some of her favorite
moments of life with Tony Phelan -- and our writer's assistant Austin is
frantically trying to keep pace and write it all down. And Bill Harper
is doing funny accents, which is really neither here nor there.) My
point is, I tend to rape and pillage my own life to bring you drama
every week. In this episode, for example, when the girl talks about
hiking the Inca Trail? That's because I hiked the Inca Trail, so I know
how to describe it. (I'm averse to research so anytime I can just write
what I know, I choose to.) And when Bailey defends her decision to leave
a marriage that was no longer feeding her soul? That was no longer an
example she wanted to set for her young child? I'm not getting too
personal here, but I'm saying, I was happy to be able to put those words
on TV. Bailey doesn't need to be berated by her dad, see? Cause Bailey?
Beats the crap out of herself way harder than anyone else ever could.
But it was nice, the way her Dad came around in the end. And I think he
was right that Bailey should've called and told him about her divorce.

Okay, what else can I tell you? I'd like to give you behind the scenes
tidbits from the shooting of the episode, but I had the damn flu the
whole time it was shooting so I was barely there. Oh! I know! Let's talk
about the fact that we did a holiday episode without Izzie! The
Twitterers have been berating us for weeks -- how COULD you, they ask?
Izzie LOVES the holidays! To you, I say, dude... I know. I feel your
pain. I wrote the last holiday episode. I remember vividly when Izzie
helped Alex study for his exams because, "It's what JESUS would freakin'
DO!" I remember when she and George and Meredith lay beneath the
Christmas tree, soaking in the lights. I missed her like crazy in this
episode and you know who else missed her? Even though he didn't talk
about it? Alex. That's why he wouldn't sing Christmas carols in the
surgery. That's why he didn't show up for dinner at Meredith's. It
breaks my heart, the way she left him, and that she didn't show up for
the holidays. I think he thought she might. Because Izzie LOVES the
holidays. But she didn't and yeah, it sucks.

But we're not barking about the bad, we're chanting the beauty so let's
talk about the Chief/Arizona/Owen Christmas jam! I have to admit, I have
never loved dailies more, ever. I must have watched them sing that song
for 20 minutes straight. Those dailies were truly a gift during my
flu-ridden misery. They lifted my whole heart up and made it feel all
floaty and giddy for hours. I hope the scene did the same for you. And
since we're chanting the good... Can we talk about the hot hot hot HOT
Owen Cristina kissing??? Oh my God, I'm like a fan girl, I can't help
it. And how 'bout the scene where Owen whispers into Teddy's mouth, "I'm
in love with Cristina." I wrote it. I pictured it. But when I saw it? I
seriously threw up a little in my mouth. It was SO brutal -- and what
was so brutal is that Owen didn't mean to be brutal. He clearly loves
them both. Which is...impossible. And devastating. And BRUTAL. I mean it
-- how could Teddy not love him? Playing guitar one minute, torturedly
whispering into her mouth the next... How that will all play out, I do
not know. I mean it, I don't know. We're a little behind in the writer's
room. But I'm as excited as you are to see how it all goes down!

There's so much more in this episode -- Mark Sloan becoming the sexiest
Grandpa on TV and Meredith making a deal with the devil and Arizona and
Derek and Mark paying their own hard-earned money to save the life of a
very sick little boy. It made my heart happy, that story. And so did the
story of the woman living without a heart for all that time and
surviving. Both of those were our gift to you, to send you into the
holiday season with hope and optimism. My friend Peter called me today
and when I said, "How are you?" He said, "I'm trying, actively, to renew
my faith and my hope and my joy and my optimism. They've all gone
missing, which is not okay with me." I love Peter. I love that when his
faith goes missing, he doesn't sit and feel sorry for himself. He goes
turning over rocks and stones, looking for it. He prays and he calls
friends and he says out loud what he's feeling. Which, in itself,
demonstrates that his faith is not as far away as he imagines. That's
the feeling I hope this episode left you with. That miracles are
possible...That a simple song can lift your spirits.... That speaking
your truth, or opening your checkbook, or offering a simple apology or
making an attempt to understand another's point of view can turn your
whole day or your whole year around. That life doesn't always happen the
way we hope or plan but that that doesn't matter. How we greet what life
throws our way is all that matters. "Do not waste yourself in rejection;
do not bark against the bad, but chant the beauty of the good." Happy
Thanksgiving. And Merry Christmas. And May There Be Peace on Earth.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
