[] William Harper on "St. Valentine's Day Massacre"...

Original Airdate: 2-11-10

Valentine's Day! A time for romance, roses, candy, candlelit dinners,
roof collapses and heart-shaped boxes of chocolates stolen from comatose
patients.

I know. The romance can get a little dark and twisty around Seattle
Grace. It's never going to be candlelight and roses. Derek can't get
three blocks on a date with his wife without being paged back for a mass
casualty. But honestly, that was the fun of writing this episode;
finding all the ways of illuminating romance.

There's the tale of unrequited love between Emile and Mrs. Banks, for
one. And Meredith and Alex get sucked in like it's a chick flick. Will
he? Won't he? Will she? I think the romance is not just in Emile's
unrequited pining, but in the warmth and comfort that Mrs. Banks has
found in decades of marriage to her husband. I think everything she says
to Meredith is true. Finding the right person, being with them, knowing
them so well -- and being known -- is romantic. That's what Meredith has
signed up for, on that post-it note. But it's still a scary proposition.
And with the new pressures Derek is facing as Chief, Meredith's suddenly
faced with the question of how she's reinvented herself in this
marriage. Will it limit her going after her passion, the thing that
makes her HER? And she's faced with deciding how much she'll commit to
the role, how she'll allow herself to be defined by it. In the end, she
learns that a marriage, like life, is a constant reinvention. You
choose, over and over again to adapt to each other and with each other,
always being clear on what you will and won't give up to accommodate the
other. Change, adaptation, is what keeps a marriage stable in an
unstable world.

What I love about this story is that, even separately, Derek and
Meredith are going through the same struggle. Being Chief apparently
means denying himself his passion -- surgery -- as he's kept from the
O.R. all night for a series of more mundane administrative tasks. I
think Derek's scene in the scrub room with April may be my favorite
example of reinvention in the episode, because, to me, it's the point
when Derek becomes the Chief he would want to be, bringing all his
compassion and experience to lead and teach. Despite that, this
transition to Chief isn't going to be easy, professionally or
personally. In the end, they'll face the struggle together. Move
forward, find a new shape. That in itself is pretty romantic.

You know what else is romantic? The First Date. There's nothing quite
like the crazy, flustered anticipation of the First Date, right? And how
awesome is it that it's Bailey's? It's sort of shocking how coolly and
cruelly Bailey shuts Ben down when he asks her out. And delightful when
we realize its because this nice, attractive, eligible man just
dismantles poor Miranda Bailey. And in the true spirit of Valentine's
Day, Arizona decides to play Cupid and get the ball rolling. And despite
Bailey wanting to KILL her, it works, she gets it together to cough out
an acceptance to dinner. It's about time Bailey gets to cut loose. As
Lexie says, change is a good thing. And in this episode, everyone is
reinventing themselves.

Two reinventions I particularly like, because they're so different, are
Lexie's and Mark's. Lexie's is blatant, and sudden and shocking: NEW
HAIR. I shaved my head once. I'm not endorsing this. But I'd always
wanted to know what I'd look like with my hair very VERY short, and I
wondered aloud about it one night and my wife said "Let's do it RIGHT
NOW!" and in minutes, clippers were buzzing, clumps of hair were flying,
and even halfway through cutting it, she and I both could tell...this
was a terrible idea. Turns out, my head has a shape that is flattered by
hair. Without it, I look like an overturned mixing bowl. "It'll grow
back, " my wife said, supportively. And it's true. It did. But that's
essentially what Jackson is saying to Lexie: New hair is a safe change,
because it's just gonna grow back. Lexie's not really committed. She
didn't do something bold and permanent, like a neck tattoo (I'm not
endorsing this, either). She made the safe change. She's made a change
that's only skin deep, and temporary. And Jackson calls her on it. (I
love that Jackson reveals this by admitting he was treated as the
pretty, dumb one. And had to reinvent himself).

But for Lexie, the hair color is different. For one thing, she looks
very good as a blonde (unlike, say, me with a buzz cut). And for Lexie,
it's an undeniable step forward -- a new look can free you up, can
release you to act like someone you're not. Or, in her case, act like
the person you've been hiding inside. Which might be kind of a badass. I
think keeping the new hair is a first step in Lexie's transformation,
and I can't wait to see where it goes from here.

The other reinvention -- Mark's -- I love because it's building over
time. It culminates when he steps up to adopt his newborn grandchild. In
an instant. In a blurt. He's wanted a child since we met him --
Addison's -- but he's spent the time since then maturing -- from
man-whore to monogamist, to responsible father to Sloan, then committing
to adopt and raise a newborn baby -- to the point where we really want
one for him: He's grown up a lot.

Teddy (And Owen) are trying to do maybe the most difficult reinvention
of all: to go backward. What I love about her speech to Owen in the
scrub room, is that, not only is it an act of forcing him to acknowledge
their friendship, but that we learn so much in that speech about the
level of camaraderie and intimacy they shared as friends in the Army.
They apparently talked about everything. That's a very difficult thing
to give up, and she just flat out refuses to do it. Can they go back to
the way things were? She and Owen both admit it's hard to do. Life moves
forward, not backward.

And so do we. Next week's episode, in fact, will give you a glimpse of a
Seattle Grace you've never seen before, and some stories of our doctors
that you never knew happened, even if you've been watching from the
beginning. It's an exhilarating, funny and really moving episode. So see
you back here, then.

Thanks for reading, and thanks for watching!

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
