[] Bill Harper on "How Insensitive"...

Original Airdate: 5-6-10

When Shonda told me, "I think we should have a 700-pound patient come to
Seattle Grace," the first thing I thought of was Patient Sensitivity.

We'd already discussed the idea of putting our doctors, infamous for
their irreverence and dark humor, their ruthless and clever nicknaming
of patients, into a lecture on Patient Sensitivity, and this seemed like
the perfect patient to tie it to. Then, I started researching Bailey's
lecture, looking around for the kinds of things that hospitals actually
recommend for doctors to do and say, and I found it really telling that
almost every program I could find was aimed toward sensitivity to
bariatric -- obese -- patients. That's partly because obesity is an
epidemic in this country -- more than one-third of Americans are
considered clinically obese -- and the medical community is racing to
catch up. And also because, sadly, obesity is often called society's
last acceptable prejudice. So sensitivity to these patients apparently
needs to be taught, stressed and re-stressed.

So we knew, with the arrival of this patient, we would explore patient
sensitivity. And also see what sensitive areas these doctors could have
exposed along the way.

In terms of insensitivity to patients, I think historically it's been a
dead heat between Alex and Cristina. So it was fun to realize that Alex,
who might be the least sensitive person among them, could be the one who
actually breaks through Bobby's armor of jokes and the layers of despair
that got him to this point, and helps him to see the good guy inside,
the way his wife does. It's the thing Alex has been learning about
himself all season. And in turn, it helps Alex move forward, saying
goodbye to Izzie for good. How big a step is he taking with Lexie,
kissing her like that in front of the whole hospital, taking her hand?
Not sure -- but in Alex terms, it looks like a giant step to me.

And on the other hand...Derek. Arguably the hospital's most sensitive
doctor, Derek utters perhaps the least compassionate thing in the
episode. It's shocking, and instantly regrettable. Very Un-Dreamy. I'll
say I had a hard time with this coming out of his mouth, and I wrote it.
But what Richard tells him is true, the job of Chief can eat away at
you, transforming even the most caring surgeon into a callous
bureaucrat. And Derek's clearly having one of the worst days of his
Chiefhood yet. That's Derek's continuing struggle, and when Mr. Clark
comes back to sue him, Derek spends the whole episode wanting to do what
he knows is right, to reach out to a broken man, to help, to heal, but
he's backed into a corner where his only job is to be factual, clinical
and unemotional. Add to that the burden of all this sensitive
information he has to control, and he and Meredith are in the same
trouble they were in season one. Only now it's worse -- their
relationship doesn't just affect their own jobs, it can potentially
affect the whole hospital.

Then there's Cristina. She has to be forcibly shoved into Patient
Sensitivity, only to find this little girl who cracks her open and
reveals her most vulnerable spot. Cristina's forced to make the girl her
patient, because she's uniquely qualified to see Kelly through what was
her most painful experience. I love the moment in the elevator, when she
makes the choice without actually knowing why she's making it -- out of
pure gut protective instinct. And, for my money, Cristina does the
kindest, most compassionate thing she could do for a child-- she lays it
all out honestly and without sugar-coating it. It's only when Jackson
says it out loud to her, makes her acknowledge the truth, that
Cristina's own dam breaks and she has to let it out. Surprisingly, she
chooses Owen over Meredith, to comfort her.

This was an interesting twist. I think it's unusual for Meredith and
Cristina to find solace in someone other than each other. But here,
Cristina needs something from Owen that she has given to him -- she's
seen him through his darkest hour, when his pain has come back to haunt
him. He knows what this feels like, and knows what to do -- how to just
ride it out. And similarly with Meredith and Derek: He's too fed up with
parsing his words and being straight jacketed into a person he's not,
Meredith knows the only thing she can say is "I love you." She's smart
enough to know that sometimes a guy just needs to shut up. Or hit
something. Like a few golf balls.

OK, now we have to talk about Callie and Arizona. They have become
pretty much my favorite couple, the ones I could count on. I want them
to stay together, but it's unavoidable. Callie finds her own sensitive
spot in this episode. She's vulnerable -- not to the come-ons of an
attractive patient -- but to the sense of possibility it represents to
her. And that's something she will never get from Arizona. Because
Arizona simply does not want a kid. It is, as they say, a dealbreaker.
As much as I hate this break up, I have to say I love this break-up,
because it feels like something many of us have been through, when we
realize that the one thing you're not getting in a relationship is just
important to you as the hundred things you are getting. I'm sorry it had
to happen. And if you're as sorry as I am, I'll just say this...keep
watching! Anything can happen -- and you might find yourself pleasantly
surprised!

A couple of random notes on the process I found interesting along the
way...

Jerry Kernion, the actor we were lucky enough to cast as Bobby, was an
incredible trooper, withstanding up to four hours of getting into fifty
pounds of latex each day to play the role, and then endured that blazing
hot suit for hours on the set, smiling and joking the entire time. And
all that latex didn't hinder his incredibly charming and heartbreaking
performance. Thanks again, Jerry.

Cristina and Kelly's card game: We talked in the writer's room about how
it's often easier for kids to take in big, important, monumental
information when they're not looking at you -- when they're
concentrating on something else. So I came up with the idea to have them
play Slap Jack, which is a card game I play with my own kids. When I
went online to make sure my family wasn't playing by some insane rules
we'd invented ourselves, I was surprised -- and a little chilled -- to
learn that there's an alternate name for the game Slap Jack. It's also
called Heart Attack.

Kelly's Mom: Was originally conceived as Kelly's dad, suffering from a
sudden heart attack. But Shonda thought it would be a good way to get
out the information that heart attack symptoms in women present very
differently than in men, and often aren't recognized for what they are.
Some women have been sent home from the ER with an antacid, when they
were actually in cardiac arrest. I know we said it in the episode, but
it bears repeating!

That's it for me for this week, and for this season -- but you've got
two more incredible nights of Grey's before we go... and trust me, you
don't want to miss them. If you're a Demi Lovato fan, you'll get a treat
next week. And then the FINALE.... I know, we've all said it, but...
holy crap, don't miss the finale.

Thanks for watching!

Bill

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
