[] Bill Harper on "Shock to the System"...

Original Airdate: 9-30-10

Over the summer, the question I was most often asked about Grey's was:
"How do you come back from something like that?" These people weren't
asking me about the show, or the writers, they were asking about the
characters. The characters they know and like as if they were their own
friends: How will they come back from that? Well, as of last week,
Grey's is back, but for our doctors, I think that question is still
valid.

If you've ever lost someone, or been terribly hurt, I think it's fair to
say that no matter how good a job you've done grieving, no matter far
you've gotten past the pain, you're never really safe from feeling that
loss again. You run across a picture. A thing they gave you. You hear a
song, or someone says a phrase, and suddenly that loss and pain is as
present and immediate as if it was happening right now. It's a shock, a
complete surprise and, like the original event itself, something you can
never see coming, never prepare yourself for. Because a trauma this
immense doesn't heal quickly. It creates wounds so deep they won't make
themselves known for a long time to come. And when they do, they
blindside you.

Last week, we saw how our doctors were trying to come back : From
rushing at life to grasping at love, to going mad, to posturing, to
hiding from the pain, we saw the ways they were trying, and sometimes
failing, to push through and heal. But they're not even really healing
yet. They're coping.

Cristina and Owen came together through trauma -- they met when he
scooped an injured Cristina off the ER bay. Then she saw Owen through
his post-war struggles. It seems almost inevitable that their wedding
would also come out of trauma. But after being so badly hurt in what is
arguably her favorite place in the world -- the O.R. -- Cristina barely
knows herself now, that's the reason she would be content to let Owen
take the driver's seat. She can trust him, he's the only thing she can
count on right now. But when his plan goes so horribly wrong in the OR
-- when lightning strikes the same place twice -- she can no longer
trust any of his decisions, or her own...She mistrusts the very impulse
to marry him. Her first, unavoidable instinct is to reverse everything
she's done.

Alex is coping too, keeping that bullet in his chest like a badge of
honor. But it's all posturing, the bravado, and the carelessness with
which he talks about the health risks...All a front. Because, though he
doesn't make a lot of noise about it, Alex isn't a guy who lets himself
off the hook very easily. And Bailey's right: that bullet in his chest
is a reminder -- a constant token of his survivor's guilt. When Bailey
finally relieves him of that burden, it's a relief for not just her, but
I hope that Alex gets to leave the guilt behind, too. And maybe he can
stop coping and start healing.

Lexie was losing sleep over the trauma, literally, to the extent that
her incredibly hardworking mind is overtaxed to the breaking point. But
she's picking herself up, trying to move on. Unfortunately, she's forced
to do battle against the stigma of being the one who fell apart. And
sadly, Mark is the biggest casualty in that battle. He's got the right
intention -- he's trying to protect her, be strong for her, basically,
he just wants to love her. Unfortunately, right now, what Lexie really
needs to feel is that she's the strongest person in her life.

Callie and Arizona are certainly moving on -- facing the realities of
taking It to the Next Level, where you really share your space, where no
one is a guest in the place, and you find that you're creating a whole
new place for the pair of you, rather than the two of you. This is a
series of tiny, difficult negotiations that add up to one giant leap for
a couple. Of course, a disagreement about wall color is not
life-and-death for their relationship. It's a hitch. But it's the
beginning of a lot of give-and--take between two really strong women,
and it will be great fun to watch where that goes.

Finally, Derek and Meredith...

Derek is still living dangerously, in the OR and out of it. I like his
speech to the Chief about driving. For one thing, Patrick Dempsey's own
passion for racing comes through pretty clearly in that speech. But
hopefully, it illuminates a little what he's been after by racking up
all these speeding tickets: it's all about losing and regaining control,
especially after his life went so completely out of control in the end
of last season.

And Meredith's going through a similar struggle. Keeping herself busy by
looking after everyone else, trying to make sure Alex is okay, that
Cristina's okay, that Lexie is okay, unable to see that the reason she's
not cleared for surgery is because she's been refusing to attend to the
deepest injury she received that day, the miscarriage. It's only when
she admits it to Derek, that she can move past it; that she can admit
that she has so little control over anything. I think it's interesting
that at the same moment that Cristina's marriage is breaking apart as a
result of the shooting, Meredith's is getting stronger, as many great
partnerships are strengthened by adversity. And it's why Mer tells
Cristina, basically, that whatever mistakes she's made, being with Owen
is not one of them. And that she should stick. I'm really glad she does.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
