[] Mark Wilding on "Superfreak"...

Original Airdate: 10-7-10

I think one of the worst things you can tell a writer is write what you
know. Or a close corollary of that -- write about your life. If you put
my life on a movie screen, the audience would demand their money back.
They wouldn't just walk out of the theatre, they'd stampede the ushers
in their rush to the exits. Unless the ushers, bored to death
themselves, had already quit their job and gone home. As much as I
really enjoy my job -- I feel EXTREMELY fortunate that I get to work
with a lot of fun people every day -- my life itself is relatively
boring.

It's divided into spending forever driving on the freeways, going to
some event at my kids' schools where none of the other parents talk to
me, playing the occasional frustrating round of golf (Why aren't I
better than this?? I've been playing this sport for 40 years for God's
sake!!), having the occasional run-in with a rude department store clerk
or bank employee and going out to dinner with my wife. I like my wife so
that part's less boring. She's also kind enough to back me up after I've
had my run-in with the rude store and/or bank employee. Although, now
that I think of it, she's probably getting a little bored herself with
my long-winded, self-justifying accounts of those run-ins.

Little bits and pieces of my life do occasionally show up on Grey's
Anatomy. Derek's taking up golf. I lobbied for that. I also suggested he
and Mark hit golf balls off the hospital roof last season. I didn't
suggest the Derek storyline with his estranged sister -- that was
Shonda's idea -- but it was an easy story for me to identify with. I
have a little sister who's ten years younger than me. We're not
estranged, far from it in fact, she's great. But, like Derek and his
sister Amy, our dad died when I was 15 and she was five. He wasn't shot.
He had a heart attack. And ever since then I've wanted to protect her
from what's out there in the world. After all, that's what older
brothers do. Protect their little sisters. Because the world doesn't
always make you feel good about yourself. In fact, more often than not,
the world makes you feel like you don't belong. Like you've missed out
on the joke. Like you're, yes... a freak.

Yup, that was the theme of my episode. Freaks. Because basically we are
all Treemen. Physically, we may not have the warts but metaphorically we
sure as hell do. Especially when I go to these damn school functions
where nobody talks to me. Nobody! And, by the way, it's not like I don't
make the effort -- I DO! I ask the other parents about themselves and
their wonderfully accomplished and oh so brilliant children (I'm never
this sarcastic with them, I promise) but, even then, even with all the
effort I'm putting into the conversation, they start looking around like
they want to talk to someone, ANYONE, but me!! THEY CAN'T LOOK AT ME.
Yes, suddenly I'M A TREEMAN!! At a PTA Meeting!!!

By the way, most of you probably already know this -- the Treeman is
based on a true story about a guy whose warts have grown so out of
control he looks like, well, a tree. If our depiction of him wasn't
gross enough for you, you can go to YouTube and watch him in his home in
the Philippines. You can also watch the operations to remove all his
warts and disturbing-looking growths. In my episode though, the story is
really about his long-suffering wife (played wonderfully by Jolene Kim;
kudos also to the angry Treeman in my episode -- Art Chudabala -- he was
great. Also extremely patient, it took our make-up department FIVE HOURS
every day to put on all those warts and growths). Emotionally, the story
plays on Mark when Mrs. Treeman wonders if love is enough to keep a
couple together. That even though you desperately love someone, you're
at such different points in your life, it just can't work. Which is a
very sad realization for Mark when it comes to Lexie.

Meantime, Lexie's doing her very best to empathize with the Treeman.
After all, she's been in his shoes. For the first couple of episodes she
was the one everybody in the hospital was staring at. We never comment
on Lexie's state of mind until the end of the episode but, after being
committed, Lexie thinks the world sees her as kind of a freak. Or as she
puts it -- "a psycho running naked down the hallway." But even her
empathy for freaks can't prevent her from having a thing about warts. By
the way, when we were coming up with the story in the room, one of the
writers was so grossed out by even the mention of warts, we had to call
them puppies. Which, yes, made this writer a little bit of a freak. And
yes, this writer has given me permission to use her name. This writer
was Krista Vernoff. You know how Bailey jumped ten feet back when she
saw the spider? That was Krista every time we mentioned warts. Sorry.
Puppies...

The other love story we got to play in the episode was Teddy with the
trauma shrink, Andrew Perkins. Teddy gets to have her freakishness
explained to her near the end of the episode. What's her problem?
Simple. She chooses men who aren't available! Bam. Wouldn't it be great
if somebody could do that for us in our every day lives? Maybe some
helpful parent would tell me that the reason the other parents at school
functions turn away from me is that I'm boring. Or that I'm such a
brilliant conversationalist they feel they can't keep up. Yeah, I like
that one. I'm going with that one for now.

The nice thing about having a big cast is that you get to mix and match
the characters in a hundred different ways. You don't often get to see
Derek and Cristina together in a story line -- they're not tremendously
fond of each other -- but she did save his life. We hadn't played any of
the fallout from that yet this season. We got our chance to do so in
this episode and it made me wonder why the heck we don't have these two
actors together more often. Patrick and Sandra were FANTASTIC together.
Of course, the sad part of the story was that despite Derek's best
intentions, Cristina is nowhere near healed. At this point she might, in
fact, be the biggest freak at Seattle Grace. Her PTSD is crippling. The
question remains --will she ever come back from what happened?

Finally, there's the subject of April's virginity and the fact it makes
her feel like a freak. I'm happy with the way we handled the story.
Callie once called Seattle Grace high school with scalpels. When the
other residents find out about April, they react the way high schoolers
might react -- with some incredulity and a fair amount of cruelty. Which
is what makes April's speech at the end so affecting. Her virginity
ISN'T drinks conversation. And she points out that, after this shooting,
they've all become freaks in their own way. It's how they cope. Which is
why I think I play golf. It helps me escape, if only for a few hours,
the things life throws at me -- the long drives to work, the run-ins
with store clerks, the indifferent reception by private school parents.
And as frustrating as the sport can be, it's also really really hard.
Most people can't play it well. Most people feel less good about
themselves when they're out on the course. And I guess that's what I
like about it so much. Because when that many people feel they can't do
something, you've joined the brotherhood of golfing freaks. And it
doesn't matter how good you are, at some point, anyone who's every
played the game has walked off the 18th hole feeling like a failure.
There's camaraderie in our ineptness. And for that, I am profoundly
comforted and more than a little grateful...

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
