[] Bill Harper on "Something's Gotta Give"...

Original Airdate: 11-11-10

Once in a while, here in the Writer's room, if we're stuck on a problem
or need a new idea, someone will yell: "Everyone think of three good
ideas in the next three minutes -- GO!" And we all stop talking and
start squinting or staring into space as we think really hard and the
room starts to smell like burnt toast, and then, "Time's up!" And we go
around the room and we have to say what we came up with. And this game
pretty much always works. We always come up with something. Why? Because
we had to. Because pressure -- even fake pressure -- pushes your brain
into survival mode, causes you to think differently, move differently
and become very creative, because the stakes have suddenly become
life-or-death. Which is why I was a little surprised to learn we'd never
done "Pressure" as a theme in six-plus seasons. I mean, these doctors
have life-and--death stakes every day. So we were interested in what
extra pressures we could put on these doctors, but even more interested
in what happens when all the pressure is taken off.

Like when you...say... quit your job.

So, yes, let's talk about Cristina first.... She left the hospital,
under what might have been the worst possible circumstances: not in a
panic or a fit of anger -- these are conditions you can get over -- but
with a clear-headed decision that surgery is just not what she wants to
do. Which is more frightening, because it means she might never come
back. What's even scarier for Cristina is the question of what she will
do now. Now that the thing she's been working toward, preparing for,
eating, sleeping and breathing for all of her adult life is suddenly off
the table. Here, she's clearly avoiding the question, as she grasps at
any and every notion that crosses her path -- from haircuts to
housewares. Anything to keep from looking at the real question: "What do
I do now?"

Callie's in a similar boat, trying to picture what her life will be
after losing the one person she really wanted to spend it with. And it
appears she's as undecided as Cristina, as she spends the whole day
trying to put a good face -- and a decent hairstyle -- on the situation.
But what Cristina says is true: we've rarely seen Callie when she wasn't
in a relationship. And in the end, she just can't do it; Callie turns to
her friend Mark and tells him she doesn't want to be alone without
someone else. I love those moments, when their friendship becomes a life
raft.

Cristina's departure is putting pressure on other people too: Meredith
heard last week that she's at least partially responsible for Cristina's
troubles; Derek feels a debt to her that he doesn't begin to know how to
repay; Owen wants the girl he met back, for her own sake as much as his;
and Teddy (thanks in part to Derek's misdirected frustration) worries
that she could have done more.

So when the Emir arrives, it puts these three in a little political
pressure cooker, where the stakes are higher because so many people have
a vested interest in the outcome of their work. As the politicos argue
about who's at fault and what's the best way to save their leader, our
doctors have to air their own agendas, point their fingers of blame, and
figure out between them the best way to save Cristina. Meredith and
Derek clearly disagree, and I think it's really surprising when he goes
behind Mer's back to steal Cristina away. It's almost a betrayal. I
would say it was a betrayal if I didn't believe that he was helping
Cristina for Meredith's sake, too. That he wants her to have her friend
back. It'll be interesting to see if Mer sees it that way.

Alex is under his own kind of pressure, the pressure to take care of his
family, which we learn about only at the end of the night. And looking
back on his day with that bit of knowledge, you can see how it informed
every decision he made. He's so furious with himself for abandoning his
family, when he fights to for a way to save the little girl from a
possibly failed liver transplant; he's trying to go the extra mile for
someone, after leaving his family to fend for themselves. And then poor
April: she basically tells him what he so needs to hear, that he's okay,
that he's a basically good person, and he reaches out for some kind of
connection, some kind of solace. But he's in such an angry, hateful
place, he's inexcusably horrible to her. And he knows it, in that
moment. He knows it at the party, too, where he wants to apologize. When
Jackson hits him, he takes the first punch as a sort of penance -- he
wants to pay the debt. The fight could stop there. But Jackson's in a
whole other place....

Now, Jackson -- it's not clear who's putting the pressure on Jackson.
It's true, he has been making a lot of mistakes in the last few months,
and he's been a little tightly wound. Maybe while we've been
concentrating on our other doctors' healing, we've not noticed that
Jackson might not be as together as he appears. But is it, as Lexie
suggests, paranoia? Maybe he's the only one putting the pressure on
himself? Really, it doesn't matter -- when that sort of stress builds
up, it just needs any little excuse to let it blow. Alex's cruel
treatment of April, who Jackson sees -- rightly or wrongly -- as his
last surviving ally, is enough. He can't control himself. This could be
the relief valve he needed to get better, since the shooting. Or it
might be the tip of the iceberg... We'll see.

Before we go, I want to say a word about Dr. Stark. Stark is a rare
presence -- he represents a type of attending surgeon we Grey's writers
have heard about many times in our research: Not incompetent, not evil,
just complacent. Lazy. Arrogant, and self-satisfied. Just the opposite
of our Seattle Grace/Mercy West Attendings. In a lesser actor's hands
Stark could come off as just a villain. But played by as intelligent,
collaborative and hilarious an actor as Peter MacNicol, you get a really
complicated human being, and that's actually makes him way scarier. We
could not have been more thrilled with this bit of casting. We've all
been a huge fans of Peter MacNicol, and he's been terrific to have on
the set.

Well, that's it for now, thanks again for watching, and reading. And
come back here next week, when Zoanne Clack will be telling you about
her episode which features, among other things, Miranda Bailey like you
have never seen her before. Ever. Really.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
