[] Krista Vernoff on "Disarm"...

Original Airdate: 1-6-11

I was really worried as we were breaking this story in the writer's room
that there wasn't any room for levity in an episode about a bunch of
college kids getting shot up -- an episode that was designed to be the
end of a 13 episode arc that began with ep. 623 last season. Bringing
our cast of characters full circle from their trauma is no small task --
but we felt like it was time to finally move past the shooting, to let
them heal, to turn the page. And we thought, what better way to do that
than to have our people save the lives of the next generation of gunshot
victims. But, again, there was the problem of finding levity. Which
could also be called Defying Gravity, a song with which my 3 year old
has recently become obsessed -- but I digress. The levity came when
someone had the idea of the Alex/Stark OR stand-off. We laughed our
asses off while we ran around the room acting out Alex's wrestler
stance, "I'm ALL STATE, BABY!" And I have to say, Justin Chambers and
Peter MacNicol delivered in spades. I was on the set for the shooting of
the scene, and in the early rehearsals they were actually wrestling
which was hilarious, but, we decided, unlikely. Often, we the writers
are at odds with the medical personnel who work so hard to make our show
look, feel and sound like a real hospital. Wrestling in the OR, as hard
as it made us laugh, was not a thing we thought we'd get by them. The
other thing they really struggled with was the idea of a MASH unit in
the hospital. But they rose to the occasion and only hated us a little
more than usual as we passionately shouted, "No, we don't care if people
would just be shipped to other hospitals! Pretend the other hospitals
are full! Pretend there was a GIANT earthquake AND a massive shooting ON
ONE DAY! Then what would happen???" They humored us and I don't know
about you but I thought the MASH unit was bad-ass. I was sad that
because of time limitations we had to cut a really funny scene in which
April ran the crap out of that MASH unit, barking orders at Stark and
the others, but I loved how it all came off -- director Debbie Allan was
INCREDIBLE in bringing it to life. I have to keep this short because
it's late and I'm hard at work on upcoming episodes. Thanks, as always,
for watching. And Happy New Year!! As they said in Spinal Tap... This
one goes to 11! xxoo Krista

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
