[] Tia Napolitano on "Start Me Up"...

Original Airdate: 1-13-11

Poor, clueless first year med students. "Too dumb to find the toilet,"
as Cristina puts it. They're peering into body cavities for the first
time, trying to impress their residents...or at least stay conscious.
All while surrounded by renowned surgical geniuses. No pressure, right?
They're star struck, over-eager, and intimidated. And somehow they
always seem to be in the way. Just ask Jackson.

It's tough being at the bottom of the surgical food chain! And I have to
empathize with these "interns and residents of tomorrow." I'm the
writers' assistant here at Grey's. I spend five days a week in a room
filled with, well, television genius. It was more than a little
intimidating at first. Luckily, I've yet to pass out on the job, and no
one writes on me with permanent marker. Although, it's entirely possible
I'll end up bedazzled one day -- our writers' room is like a
kindergarten stocked with glitter, glue and paints. But I probably
shouldn't give them any ideas...

Bedazzling aside, my job is kind of awesome. Ok, the bedazzling is kind
of awesome, too. I get to sit in the room and take notes while the
writers simultaneously goof off and unspool their genius. I also used to
be the writers' PA here, so I had the pleasure of posting (and posting,
and posting...you fans have a lot to say!) all of your blog comments.
And I know you guys aren't reading this to hear what I ate for breakfast
this morning. You want the inside scoop on this episode.

One tiny thing first. I'd like to do our writers' PA, Fran, the favor
our researcher, Meg, once did for me. Fran moderates all the comments on
this blog, and there's one rule that you should keep in mind when
posting: be nice to Fran. Also, WHEN YOU YELL IN ALL CAPS AT FRAN, it's
a little bit scary. Don't scare Fran. And don't curse at Fran! Fran
keeps the writers fed, and caffeinated. And writers that are well fed
and well caffeinated write the best episodes. So please be nice to Fran.
You wouldn't want to get on her bad side...

Speaking of bad sides, remind me never to piss off Callie Torres! She's
certainly not that girl who forgives and forgets at the first glimmer of
an apology. "I. Don't. Want. You. In my life." Could she be any clearer?
It's heartbreaking. But I was so, so proud of Callie for standing her
ground. Girl's got principles. All Arizona wants is a second chance with
the woman she loves. Is that really so much to ask? Turns out it is.
Because not only is Callie deeply hurt, she's also pregnant. With Mark's
baby.

Wow. That lands on Arizona like a slap across the face. Do you remember
when she iced Alex after finding out he slept with Callie? And that
happened before Callie and Arizona were even dating. Mark Sloan might
want to invest in a new deadbolt for his door. And a guard dog.

In a way, this is everything Callie wanted (she was the girl with the
aching womb!). It's just not wrapped in the pretty package she probably
envisioned. But that's life. And Callie knows it. And it's not quite the
fresh start Arizona was looking for either, though it is the beginning
of something...

Bailey's wading into unchartered territory, too. Talk of steamy on-call
room rendezvous and dirty notes left in charts? Dr. Bailey? This is
something the room struggled with. How can she still be Bailey while
doing such un-Bailey-like things? What we figured out is that Miranda
Bailey is still the same person, with a slightly new attitude. There are
people, like Eli, who enter our lives and instantly change them, even if
only a little. "Why the hell not?"

Our doctors are dynamic. They grow, change, roll with the punches. Look
at Meredith, peeing on ten stolen pregnancy tests hoping for just one to
be positive. She thinks she's gone soft core. At least in the race for
Chief Resident. But as the Chief points out, the residents have been
getting evaluated since their first day at the hospital. It's a
marathon, not a sprint...kind of like trying to make a baby.

Not a bad deal for Derek, who's happily "practicing" with his wife. But
Mer's fearing the worst, agonizing all day over the failed pregnancy
tests. She's an overachiever! And this failing thing? It's not cool.
Baby-making isn't a surgery Mer can study up for and then rock. Practice
does make perfect. So she'll have to be patient.

One last thing. It's so great to have Cristina back in the hospital! And
just in time to haze the med students and caution Mer about poo-covered
babies. Is there really such a thing as a clean slate? It doesn't seem
like it. Cristina's back in the game, but she's not starting over, just
continuing to build the career she's worked so hard for. She's up
against some fierce competition. But that's how all our doctors thrive
-- under pressure. And I can't wait to see how they step it up in the
final leg of the race.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
