[] Austin Guzman on "P.Y.T. (Pretty Young Thing)"...

Original Airdate: 2-10-11

In last week's Grey Matter, Mark Wilding told you all about the time he
tried (and failed) to be an actor. In high school, I also tried my hand
at acting. There's a difference between Mark and myself, though. I
didn't just try. I freaking succeeded.

Which was handy because I loved attention.

As I quickly discovered, if you auditioned for a play and got a part,
people would be FORCED to pay attention to you. And if you got the lead
(as I did on more than one occasion -- brag, brag, brag), they'd have to
pay attention to you for as many as TWO WHOLE HOURS. Once, an elderly
couple even came up to me at Hometown Buffet to tell me that they had
seen and enjoyed my performance as King Arthur in our school's
production of Camelot. I was a mother-flippin' star.

But a person gets older. Maybe wiser. He leaves behind dreams of
celebrity and pursues a career behind the scenes. (Though still in a
capacity where he will be paid his fair share of attention. Hey, reader!
Thanks for your time!)

Then one day, while casting actors to play Clinical Trial Patients and
their family members for an episode of Grey's Anatomy, a producer
suggests that it would be funny if THE WRITER played one of those family
members.

Oh hey there, Former Dreams of Super-stardom. It's been a while. Nice to
see you again.

So, of course I said, "yes." How could I not? And it's not like it was
going to be super-tough or anything. The family members in this sequence
didn't have any lines. I'd just have to sit at a table, pretend to care
about the person sitting next to me and NOT look like a big, fat idiot.
I could totally do that. After all, I was once recognized and praised by
my adoring fans while loading up on bread pudding in a buffet line.

HERE'S THE THING, THOUGH: There's a difference between standing onstage
in the high school auditorium and being on the set of a television show
with a great, big professional TV camera staring you down. You're
suddenly the most self-conscious you've ever been in your entire life.
You can't stop thinking about the fact that just two days ago you'd
gotten the worst haircut a person has ever gotten. Ever. You've also
recently put on ten (but probably more like fifteen) pounds, which will
combine with the extra weight the camera adds to make you look like
Santa Claus, age 29. There are bright lights shining in your eyes making
it nearly impossible to see, which you can't really do anyway because
you've taken off your glasses, knowing that your mom would later
complain that she couldn't see your face if you left them on even though
you now realize that ain't nobody gonna miss your big damned head
because of all that extra weight and HOLY HELL WHY WON'T YOUR MOUTH STOP
TWITCHING???

This is your moment. The nation is watching. You're sitting across the
table from Meredith Grey herself in an honest-to-God consult room at
Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital... and you probably look like a big,
fat idiot.

The stakes are huge, people. Which is why I can totally identify with
what it must feel like to be a doctor who's about to perform a heart
transplant on a baby who hasn't been born yet.

In this week's episode, Alex and Lucy go head to head over just such a
case. Lucy is so shocked and offended when Alex refers to a brain-dead
baby as a "turnip in the cabbage patch" that there is absolutely no way
she's going to let him get near a baby. It's a fair position to take if
you don't know Alex Karev. When you're just meeting the guy, he comes
across as a jerk-ass wrestler with a crappy attitude. What you don't
know is that once upon a time, Arizona actually gave Alex a speech about
the fact that a peds surgeon has to do whatever they can to not picture
"tiny coffins" all day, every day. So you don't see that what Alex is
doing when he calls a baby a "turnip" is distancing himself, playing
down the stakes of what he's about to do, so that he can keep a calm
head, not get too emotionally involved, and actually be able to help his
patient. Yeah, it may not be the best tactic. And even though Arizona
was the one who gave Alex the speech way back when, she's not
particularly thrilled with the way he's chosen to cope, either. But at
least she gets why he's doing it. In the end, Alex and Lucy are in the
same boat -- doing what they think is best for the tiny, tiny patients
they're trying to help.

Okay, so maybe my situation isn't really the same as Alex & Lucy's.
There probably won't be any tiny coffins involved if I can't stop my lip
from twitching as though I've injected it with caffeine. (At least, I
hope not. That'd be terrible. And crazily improbable.)

Speaking of caffeine, there's that whole Callie/Arizona/Mark situation.
While the parent-to-baby ratio is surely going to have some benefits
once that baby is born, Callie is quickly realizing that it's also
putting her smack-dab in the middle of a 2 vs. 1 scenario and NOT in the
way she might've anticipated. While Arizona and Mark do want what's best
for the baby, they're kind of forgetting that making the mother
miserable isn't going to help anyone. Callie's not being irresponsible
or unreasonable in what she's asking for. She's not putting herself or
the baby at risk. SHE JUST WANTS ONE CUP OF COFFEE. And, in the end,
Arizona and Mark know that a little bit of compromise is a small price
to pay for a happy home life. Which is maybe a lesson that Lexie needs
to learn, too...

Lexie's dealing with the P.Y.T. (Pretty Young Thing) referenced in the
episode's title. This is actually how we writers referred to Thatcher
Grey's twenty-seven-year-old girlfriend, before we dubbed her "Dani."
Here's the thing. I have a little experience dealing with "Dad's New
Girlfriend," myself. I was in college when my dad met the woman who has
since become my stepmother. Sure, my dad had the good sense to choose
someone who was age appropriate, but it's still a strange thing when
you've grown up seeing your parent a certain way, then are suddenly
forced to see him as someone who goes on dates with a lady you've only
just this moment met at a barbecue. I think I handled the situation with
a little more grace than Lexie is initially able to muster. I'm pretty
sure I've never screamed in my stepmom's face. For one reason, it's
because like Dani, my stepmom's actually a lovely person. But also, as
Shonda once put it in the writers' room when we discussed this episode -
when it comes to family, you've got to get onboard or you're going to
lose them. It takes a lecture from Meredith and something like fifteen
peanut butter cups from Jackson to get Lexie to figure this point out,
but she does come around. She might not love the idea of Dani, but she
loves her father and if not losing her relationship with him means being
nice to a tattooed lady, then so be it.

And what about Jackson and those peanut butter cups? It would seem that
while Jackson's at first open to Mark's offer of trading awesome
surgeries for information on Lexie, something changes while he watches
her eat that candy and talk and talk and talk... Earlier in the episode,
Jackson insists to Mark that he and Lexie aren't close, but they sure do
seem to be a bit closer by the end of the day. So much so that Jackson
is willing to miss out on surgeries that might help him win Chief
Resident if it means keeping Lexie's secrets. I've said it before, but I
find Lexie Grey incredibly charming. And from the look on Jackson's face
at the end of the episode, something tells me he's starting to as
well...

Meredith, on the other hand, is not as charmed by Lexie today. And
that's because she's simply not worried about her dad and his
girlfriend. Dani makes Thatcher happy? Awesome. Mazel tov. If Dani wants
to be there to hold Thatcher's hand while he deals with a kidney stone,
then it means that Meredith doesn't have to do it. Which is fantastic,
because Meredith seriously doesn't have the time. Not only is she
dealing with all the work that comes with an Alzheimer's Clinical Trial,
but now The Chief's offering her what could be an even more prestigious
Clinical Trial -- a Clinical Trial based on Ellis Grey's research.

As we put this story together, we always knew that we wanted Meredith to
decide to stick with Derek's Alzheimer's Trial, but we weren't always
clear on WHY. We knew it felt right to us, but we weren't sure what
Meredith's reasons would be. At a certain point it was pitched that
Meredith would decide that the Alzheimer's trial belonged to her, while
the diabetes trial belonged to her mother - Meredith wanted to make a
name for herself under her own steam. And while that may still be partly
true, it ultimately didn't feel completely right. Further discussion
brought us to the real heart of the matter: Richard is offering Meredith
the chance to complete Ellis' work -- to ensure her professional legacy.
Derek is offering Meredith the chance to cure her mother's disease.
Richard suggests that Ellis's research is Meredith's birthright. But
what Ellis really left Meredith was first-hand experience of just how
terrifying a disease Alzheimer's can be and the drive to keep others
from having to go through that, too.

Okay, so fine. My problem isn't really all that high-stakes when
compared to curing diseases or whatever. In fact, my moment has come and
gone and chances are you missed it completely. But, I promise you this:
my mom sure didn't. And I have a feeling this half-second of screen time
is going to follow me around for a while yet.

Austin's Mom: "Did you see Austin on Grey's? No? Well, here, I have it
cued up on my phone..."

Austin's Mom's friend: "Which one's Austin? The one who looks like Santa
Claus, age 29?"

Whatever. That's the price you pay when you're a super-star.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
