[] Shonda Rhimes on "Song Beneath The Song"...

Original Airdate: 3-31-11

HOW AND WHY WE DID THIS:

So, on about the third day of filming the pilot episode of Grey's
Anatomy (way back before it was even called Grey's Anatomy, back when it
was called The Untitled Shonda Rhimes Pilot), I turned to exec producer
Betsy Beers and said, "I can't wait to do a musical episode of this
show." See, I have this wild obsession with musicals and an unhealthy
love of the Buffy the Vampire Slayer musical and also, I'm a geek. Which
is why I said it.

"I can't wait to do a musical episode of this show," I said.

And Betsy, who is wise and funny and wry, just nodded. "Okay," she said.
And we went back to watching Patrick Dempsey pretend to do brain
surgery.

One hundred forty-four episodes and seven and a half years later, we
began filming the Grey's Anatomy Music Event.

Explaining what the heck took us so long is too complicated to go into
here. There are a lot of reasons -- I was busy telling other awesome
stories at Seattle Grace, I got a second show (what up, Private Practice
peeps!), I was raising my tiny human, my musical talent involves
oboe-playing and nothing else, the network thought it was the dumbest
idea they'd ever heard of and refused to do it.

And, oh yeah, one other thing: I had no idea how we would do it.

So I forgot about my musical episode dreams.

Then a thing happened in Season Four of the show. The Writers Guild of
America went on strike. Which meant that, instead of writing my TV show
inside my studio office, I carried a picket sign up and down the street
in front of my studio office. It also meant that I got worried. About
the crews who work hard on TV shows and movies. I got worried about how
they would pay their bills. And so a bunch of us at Private Practice and
Grey's Anatomy got together and decided to throw a benefit concert to
raise money for the crews.

I stood backstage at this concert and I listened to members of both of
my casts sing (Audra McDonald, folks, she has four Tony Awards and the
chick can BLOW -- buy a ticket and hear the woman sing sometime). Sara
Ramirez closed the benefit. And when she opened her mouth, she brought
the house down. I know people say that -- brought the house down. It's a
thing people say. But Sara Ramirez (who has a Tony of her own) BROUGHT
THE HOUSE DOWN. She's a superhero. Singing is her super power.

Now, most of us have a super power. Dempsey has that twinkle in his eye.
Also, he can juggle. And babies, all babies, every baby in the world,
ALL BABIES love him. It's amazing how much babies love him. They just
stop crying when he's around and stare at him and smile. It's
awe-inspiring. The man commands the hearts and souls of babies. He's a
baby-mesmerizer. If I ever have another baby, I am going to bring her to
work and hand her to Patrick and walk away for hours at a time. She will
be the happiest baby in the world. I'm telling you, every baby in the
world seems to get that he's McDreamy. Super. Freaking. Power.

But I digress. Anyway, most of us have super powers. But not a lot of us
have super powers that involve opening our mouths and having God come
out. I'm not a big God person but that's really the only way to describe
what happens when Sara sings. God, or whatever you want to call the
magic of the universe, comes out.

You know who else has that super power? Chyler Leigh. And she didn't
even know she had it. Also Kevin McKidd. Who knew he had it but is all
Scottish and humble and didn't reveal it. Also Justin Chambers. Who is
just so cool that it makes sense that he has it. Also Chandra Wilson.
Who has it but gets nervous when she has to sing. Also-

You see my point. Our bench is deep.

(It is also deep on Private Practice, scary deep, shockingly,
brilliantly deep, but I'm talking about Grey's here so I'll save that
for when I meet you and you ask me about it.)

Anyway, it was Season Four and we hadn't met Kevin McKidd yet and I
still hadn't come up with an idea for a musical episode and I still only
play the oboe and the network was still saying no. But it made me think
about it again. It made all the writers sit around and say, "We wish we
could do a musical episode of Grey's Anatomy."

Two more seasons went by and...nothing.

Then at the very beginning of Season 7, I said to the writers that
Callie should get pregnant with Mark Sloan's baby and that it should be
complicated and horrible and really upset Arizona. And suddenly, I knew
what the musical episode should be about.

So I started begging people. I begged the studio people. I begged the
network people. I took these people to dinner and begged. I jumped out
at these people in bathrooms and begged. And they all smiled politely
but what they were clearly really thinking was, "This woman is an
idiot."

So I did the only thing I could think of. I got Tony Phelan (one of our
writers, as you know, but also a great big musical theatre geek like me
only he has real musical theatre talent) to help me. I also got Chandra
and Sara and Kevin to help me. And then I dragged all of the studio and
network executives in to work on a Saturday. Sandra Oh showed up to be
our cheerleader. There was an amazing band. And in front of the studio
and network execs (who are all very nice and very smart but clearly
thought I might be a Grade A Idiot), we threw a great big concert. I
pitched my idea and Chandra and Kevin and Sara sang. And God came out of
their mouths. And the studio and the network stopped thinking I was an
idiot and they said yes.

Seven and a half years. One hundred and forty-four episodes.

We started rehearsals a full four months before we filmed -- unheard of
for our show. We usually prep a show for eight days. Sara Ramirez was
the one who gave me the idea that we should sing the songs our show had
made famous. Tony Phelan was the one who directed the episode. The
entire writing staff helped me make the script make sense. Bossy McBossy
Rob Corn never once complained about how overbudget we were. The crew
went all in, leaping off this crazy cliff of music with us. And every
single member of the cast got excited and came together like the family
they are to do this right.

Even Pompeo. Who is funny and kind and who has never once hesitated to
do any of the crazy things I write for Meredith to do but who was also a
little worried I might have turned into an idiot. She came up to me
after the table read for the episode and said, "This is amazing. I want
to sing more!"

And when I walked on stage and watched the episode being filmed, I felt
like it was worth every minute of begging to get it done. I hope you
think so too.

"I can't wait to do a musical episode of this show," I said way back
then. And Betsy nodded.

And now we have done it.

On Monday (yes, just this past Monday) I stood on the mixing stage,
watching the final playback of the musical episode on a giant movie
screen (and boy, how I wish you could see it with surround sound on a
movie screen), and then I went to Betsy and I said, "I can't wait to do
another musical episode of this show. I want to see Ellen Pompeo sing
Rilo Kiley." And Betsy nodded.

So now I have another dream to dream. I kind of like to think that
dreaming is my super power. That or oboe playing. But nobody likes it
when I play the oboe so, you know, I'm gonna go with dreaming.

Thank you so much for watching. I mean it. My gratitude is large and my
appreciation is limitless.

This blog post was originally posted on greyswriters.com and an archive
of the posts can now be found at ABC.com.

Category:Grey Matter
